 1
Compressed k2-Triples for Full-In-Memory RDF Engines
Sandra Álvarez-García, Nieves R. Brisaboa
Univ. of A Coruña (Spain)
salvarezg@udc.es, brisaboa@udc.es
Javier D. Fernández, Miguel A. Martínez-Prieto
Univ. of Valladolid (Spain), Univ. of Chile (Chile)
jfergar@infor.uva.es, migumar2@infor.uva.es  
ABSTRACT
Current “data deluge” has flooded the Web of Data with very large RDF datasets. They are hosted and queried through
SPARQL endpoints which act as nodes of a semantic net built on the principles of the Linked Data project. Although this
is a realistic philosophy for global data publishing, its query performance is diminished when the RDF engines (behind
the endpoints) manage these huge datasets. Their indexes cannot be fully loaded in main memory, hence these systems
need to perform slow disk accesses to solve SPARQL queries.
This paper addresses this problem by a compact indexed RDF structure (called k2-triples) applying compact k2-tree
structures to the well-known vertical-partitioning technique. It obtains an ultra-compressed representation of large RDF
graphs and allows SPARQL queries to be full-in-memory performed without decompression. We show that k2
Keywords
-triples
clearly outperforms state-of-the-art compressibility and traditional vertical-partitioning query resolution, remaining very
competitive with multi-index solutions.
RDF compressed index, SPARQL querying, k2
INTRODUCTION
-tree.
The W3C originally recommended RDF (Resource Description Framework) as a “foundation for processing metadata”
and establishes that its broad goal is “to define a mechanism for describing resources”. This conception was clearly
influenced by a document-centric perspective of the Web. Although the current Recommendation1 shares these original
foundations, it also devises an evolution by suggesting the use of RDF “to do for machine processable information
(application data) what the WWW has done for hypertext: to allow data to be processed outside the particular
environment in which it was created, in a fashion that can work at Internet scale”. This statement shows a perfect
description of the RDF status in the current evolution of the Web, where the Linked Data project2
Linked Data is about employing RDF and HTTP to publish structured data on the Web and to connect it between
different data sources. This movement has allowed the original document-centric perspective of the Web to evolve to a
data-centric one in which the term “Web of Data” is commonly used. RDF is a cornerstone in this Web of Data
providing a graph-based data model for structuring and linking data which describes facts of the world (Bizer, Heath and
Berners-Lee, 2009). This knowledge is modeled by using atomic triple units which comprise a subject “S” (the resource
being described), a predicate “P” (the property), and an object “O” (the property value). In turn, the SPARQL
Recommendation
plays a crucial role.
3
The Web of Data comprises very large RDF datasets from diverse fields. Its size is currently estimated in 25 billion
triples
establishes a specific language for querying RDF data. It is based on triple patterns, i.e., RDF triples
in which each subject, predicate or object may be a variable. Thus, SPARQL queries contain many conjunctions of triple
patterns which are resolved by graph matching.
4                                                          
1 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar/
. Thus, performance and scalability issues arise when this data needs to be managed and queried. One can think
that size is not an issue because cheaper disks are available for storage purposes. However, large size not only penalizes
querying but also the performance of other common processes such as RDF publication and exchange. Note that this
latter one is becoming even more popular due to the increasing usage of SPARQL endpoints to perform remote SPARQL
queries which transmit their results through the net.  A recent work (Fernández, Martínez-Prieto and Gutiérrez, 2010)
addresses this problem by understanding the logical structure of an RDF dataset. This approach, called HDT (Header-
Dictionary-Triples), considers three components to describe an RDF dataset: 1) the Header contains metadata about the
2 http://linkeddata.org/
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
4 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/lodcloud/ 

 2
dataset; 2) the Dictionary organizes the different URIs, blanks and literals used in the dataset, and 3) the set of Triples
encodes the pure structure of the underlying RDF Graph. HDT allows very compact RDF representations to be achieved
and gives a natural division of components to facilitate RDF management in real applications. We will use these three
terms in the rest of the paper to refer the corresponding component in an RDF dataset.
This paper deals with a compact representation of the RDF structure (Triples) able to be queried with SPARQL. We
consider sophisticated compressed data structures that allow Triples to be efficiently loaded and queried in main memory
due to its small size. Our approach, called k2-triples, models the Triples component by using compressed k2-trees
(Brisaboa, Ladra and Navarro, 2009) originally conceived for compact representation of web graphs, but recently
generalized for representing general graph databases (Álvarez, Brisaboa, Ladra and Pedreira, 2010). Thus, k2
The main contributions of this paper are:
-triples
gives an ultra-compressed index on the structure of the RDF graph and allows SPARQL queries to be performed without
prior decompression. All this process is carried out in main memory enhancing the query performance process against to
state-of-the-art engines which also need to access secondary memory because of the large size of their (multiple) indexes. 
• An ultra-compressed representation of RDF graphs, allowing very large datasets to fit in main memory. 
• Native support for triple pattern queries on the compressed representation.
• Efficient performance for conjunctive queries on top of the triple patterns.
The paper is organized as follows. Next section reviews the state-of-the-art for RDF engines and describes the k2-tree
structure as basis to our k2-triples approach. The Evaluation section compares k2
STATE-OF-THE-ART
-triples against the state-of-the-start,
focusing on compression ratios and querying times for some real-world datasets. Finally, we devise future lines of work
from the current achievements.
RDF is a logical data model which does not limit its physical storage. This fact allows different solutions to be
approached for storing RDF in an effective way. Some of them have stored RDF in a relational database and have
performed SPARQL queries through SQL; C-Store (Abadi, Marcus, Madden and Hollenbach, 2007), Monet-DB5 or
Virtuoso6
The description of vertical-partitioning policy implicitly suggests a subject-object (SO) index for each predicate. It allows
some SPARQL queries to be speeded up, but makes some others difficult: e.g. triple patterns with unbounded predicates.
C-Store and Monet-DB, adequately tuned (Sidirourgos, Goncalves, Kersten, Nes and Manegold, 2008), provide these
features on column-oriented databases. Other approaches (regarding a triple as a 3-dimensional entity) arise under this
previous weakness. Hexastore (Weiss, Karras and Bernstein, 2008) and RDF-3X (Neumann and Weikum, 2010) are
well-known systems which create indexes for all ordering combinations (SPO, SOP, PSO, POS, OPS, OSP). Although
their main goal is achieving a global competitive performance, this index replication largely increases spatial
requirements. RDF-3X reduces this effect by applying gap-compression to the leafs of the B
are well-known systems implementing this solution. Two basic policies are considered to transform RDF into a
relational representation: (1) storing all triples in a large 3-column table [S,P,O], and (2) grouping triples by predicate
and defining a specific 2-column table: [S,O] for each one; this last technique, called vertical-partitioning, is based on
the fact that few predicates are used to describe a dataset. A third hybrid policy combines the previous two to obtain
some 3-column table clustering correlated predicates 
+
A recent approach, called BitMat (Atre, Chaoji, Zaki and Hendler, 2010), suggests a compressed bit-matrix structure for
storing huge RDF graphs. This description shows two promising features: 1) a native compressed structure for RDF
representation, and 2) the ability to manage huge graphs in contrast with the lack of scalability of some previous systems
(Sidirourgos et al., 2008). Although BitMat is conceptually designed as a bit-cube S×P×O, its practical representation
slices to get two-dimensional matrices: SO and OS for each predicate, PO for each subject and PS for each object. These
matrices are gap-compressed by taking advantage of their sparseness. Whereas the feature 2) is demonstrated on huge
datasets, the compression comparison shows that BitMat is not able to outperform RDF-3X. All these works present a
common weakness already reported in experimental studies: the problem of managing large datasets and the efficiency
waste of disk transfers  (Sidirourgos et al., 2008).
-tree storing triples. 
5 http://monetdb.cwi.nl/
6 http://www.openlinksw.com/dataspace/dav/wiki/Main/VOSRDF 

 3 
Figure 1. Example of k2
k2-trees
-tree (k=2)
k2-trees (Brisaboa et al, 2009) was originally designed as a compact structure for web graph representation taking
advantage  of large empty areas existing in its adjacency matrix. This method achieves a very compact space and enables
an efficient bidirectional navigation over the graph. It allows direct and inverse neighbors to be retrieved on the
compressed structure. Additionally, k2-trees also supports other navigation operations such as range queries or checking a
particular cell value.
The k2-tree method represents the adjacency matrix using a non-balanced k2-ary tree.  It subdivides the input matrix into
k2 submatrices of the same size.  Each of those submatrices will be a child of the root node and its value will be 1 iff the
submatrix contains at least one cell with value 1. Otherwise, its value will be 0 and the tree decomposition ends there
because this submatrix is empty.  Once this first level has been built, the method proceeds recursively for each child with
value 1, until it reaches the last level of the tree where the elements corresponds to the matrix cell values.  Figure 1
shows an example of an adjacency matrix of a graph, and how it is subdivided to obtain the corresponding k2-tree using
k=2.
The whole adjacency matrix is represented in a very compact way using just two bit-arrays: T (tree) and L (leaves). T 
stores all the levels except the last one, following a levelwise traversal.  L stores the last level of the tree. An auxiliary
structure is created over T to allow navigation through the compact representation of the tree. To find the neighbors of a
node, the k2-tree needs to locate which cells in a certain row or column of the adjacency matrix have a 1. To locate those
cells, we go down through the k children corresponding to those submatrices that overlap with the row (column) of the
node of the query. This top-down traverse can be efficiently performed over the bit-arrays T and L. 
All k2-trees used in this work are physically built on a hybrid policy which uses values k=4, up to the level 5 of the tree,
and then k=2, for the rest ones (Brisaboa et al, 2009). The leaf level is encoded using Directly Addressable Codes
parameterized with b=8 (Ladra, 2011). 
K2-TRIPLES
This approach provides a compact representation for the Triples component w.r.t. the philosophy of Header-Dictionary-
Triples partitioning for large RDF datasets (Fernández et al.,2010).  k2-triples is based on the vertical-partitioning of the
dataset. It allows triples to be regarded as a cloud of points distributed in the underlying two-dimensional structure of the
k2-tree. This way, k2-triples achieves ultra-compressed representations which can be fully loaded and queried in main
memory and allows us to face up the problems underlying in the state-of-the-art.
Each triple (S,P,O) is mapped to a set of three integer-IDs which identify their corresponding components in the
Dictionary. We consider a previous experience (Atre et al., 2010) to describe the following four categories (being each
one lexicographically sorted):
• Common subjects and objects (SO) contain all terms which play subject and object roles in the dataset. These
terms are mapped to the range [1, |SO|] in order to obtain efficient cross-joins among subjects and objects.
• Subjects (S) contain all subjects which do not play an object role. These are mapped to [|SO|+1, |SO|+|S|]. 

 4 
Figure 2. Mapping from triples to IDs 
Figure 3. Vertical-Partitioning on k2-trees (k=4).
• Objects (O) contain all objects which does not play a subject role. These are mapped to [|SO|+1, |SO|+|O|].
• Predicates (P) contain all predicates. These are mapped to [1,|P|].
Figure 2 shows an example of mapping from triples (left) to IDs (right) and the resultant Dictionary configuration for this
RDF. As can be seen, <../wikipage2> is the unique element playing roles of subject and object and it is identified
with the ID 1; subject elements are identified as 2 and 3, object elements are identified from 2 to 6, and the predicates
use the IDs from 1 to 3.
Vertical-Partitioning on k2-trees
We consider the previous experiences in vertical-partitioning to approach k2-triples: we use an independent k2-tree for
indexing all triples associated with a certain predicate. All these k2-trees are designed as square binary matrices
representing subjects as rows and objects as columns. Its final size is rounded up to the next power of k:
n=k┌logk(|SO|+max(|S|,|O|)┐. This extension is made by padding with 0s to the right and to the bottom. This decision
does not cause a significant overhead by considering the k2-tree ability to handle large areas of 0s. 
Figure 3 shows how k2-triples represents the dataset considered in Figure 2. Three independent k2-trees are used for
indexing the triples associated with each predicate. Note that only the three first rows (for the three existing subjects) and
the six first columns (for the six objects) are really used in each k2-tree, hence all triples are stored in these ranges. For
instance, the predicate 2 takes part in three triples: (2,2,4),(1,2,5) and (3,2,6), and its corresponding k2-tree
stores them in the coordinates (2,4),(1,5)and (3,6), which represent the corresponding subject-object pairs. 
Final k2-tree configurations describe very sparse 1 distributions. This result is in line with (Fernández et al., 2010) which
shows that subjects related to predicate-object and objects related to subject-predicate are very few for real-world
datasets. In this scenario, k2-trees arise as an effective solution due to its ability to represent these NULL areas in a
compact manner.
As we explain below, all basic SPARQL queries can be answered on k2-tree primitive operations. That is, all triple
patterns7
7 Triple pattern notation uses ?X values to indicate unbounded elements. 
are implemented by checking points existence or by traversing column/rows: 

 5
• The simple pattern (S,P,O) asks about the existence of the given triple. It is answered by checking whether
the point (S,O) in the k2-tree representing P contains the bit 1. In turn, the pattern (S,?P,O) is solved by
performing the previous operation on all k2-trees. That is, the points (S,O) are checked in all k2-trees and all
predicates containing 1 in this cell are returned as results.
• Patterns (S,P,?O) and (S,?P,?O) are implemented, like direct neighbors, as a forward navigation (from
subject to object) of the k2-tree. The first pattern (returning all objects related with the subject S through the
predicate P) is solved by locating all 1s in the row of the subject S.  The resulting list is ordered by object-ID.
(S,?P,?O) is basically solved by performing the previous pattern for all predicates and retrieving all existing
pairs (P,O) for the given subject S.
• Patterns (?S,P,O) and (?S,?P,O) are implemented, like reverse neighbors, as a backwards navigation
(from object to subject) of the k2-tree. The first pattern (returning all subjects related with the object O through
the predicate P) is solved by locating all 1s in the column of the object O.  The resulting list is ordered by
subject-ID. (?S,?P,O) is basically solved by performing the previous pattern for all predicates and retrieving
all existing pairs (S,P) for the given subject O.
• The pattern (?S,P,?O) retrieves all pairs (S,O) for a given predicate P. This operation returns all 1s in the
chosen k2-tree by performing a range search query. Finally, the unusual pattern (?S,?P,?O) retrieves all
triples in the dataset by performing the previous pattern for all predicates.
The conjunction of these patterns allows more complex queries to be obtained through join conditions. Previous work on
vertical-partitioning (Abadi et al., 2007) explains how joins on subjects can be efficiently performed because of subjects
are indexed for each predicate. This also provides fast merge joins on subjects when the predicate is unbounded in the
pattern. An additional index, which adds a significative overhead to the final representation size, is needed to achieve the
same performance on objects. However, the main weakness of vertical-partitioning is related to queries involving
unbounded predicates. It is already an expensive operation by considering that it need to access to all tables representing
the given predicates, but it also requires extra I/O time to load some of these tables from secondary memory.
k2-triples faces up these problems and gives native support for their solutions. On the one hand, the k2-tree provides
indexed access to subjects and objects allowing both subject-subject and object-object joins to be efficiently performed.
Additionally, k2-triples allows required merge joins to be directly performed on the sorted lists returned as result for
patterns with unbounded subjects or objects. Therefore, it is also efficient for cross-joins (between subjects and objects).
Note that these operations can be easily solved in the submatrix [1, |SO|]×[1, |SO|] which stores, for each predicate, all
possible results for these joins. On the other hand the ultra-compressibility of k2-triples allows all k2-trees to fir in main
memory, saving the disk transference overheads and enabling its efficient traversing to solve queries with unbounded
predicates. 
Figure 4. Join categorization for Subject-Object (SO).
k2-triples currently supports joins subject-subject (SS) and object-objet (OO), and cross-joins between subjects and
objects (SO).  We classify these joins in six categories in accordance with their implementation on the k2-tree (Figure 4
shows examples of each category for SO joins):
• Joins-A: is the simplest class and comprises queries in where only the join variables are unbounded. That is:
(?X,P1,O1) (?X,P2,O2) for SS, (S1,P1,?X) (S2,P2,?X) for OO, and (?X,P1,O1) (S2,P2,?X) for SO. These
are implemented by individually solving each triple pattern upon direct or reverse neighbors retrieval and the 

 6
resulting lists are then intersected to obtain the final result. Note that this intersection is performed in a very faster
way by taking advantage of the ID-ordered of both lists.
• Joins-B: are similar to the previous one but, in this case, one triple pattern have an unbounded predicate;
(?X,?Y,O1) (S2,P2,?X) is an example for SO. We firstly resolve the pattern with the bounded predicate and the
resulting list is then intersected with all lists obtained from the pattern with unbounded predicate. The final result
is the union of all these lists
• Joins-C: consists in joins in where both triple patterns have unbounded predicates: (?X,?Y,O1) (S2,?Z,?X). 
The process resolves each pattern and then intersects the resulting lists by taking advantage of their ID-ordering.
All these patterns have in common that predicates can be bounded or unbounded but non-joined subjects and objects
(in each case) are given as constants. The next three categories consider non-joined unbounded subjects and objects:
• Joins-D: comprise patterns with bounded predicates and one subject or object variable in one pattern;
(?X,P1,O1) (?Y,P2,?X) is an example for SO. These joins resolve the less uncertainly pattern and retrieves all
possible values for the join variable. In the previous example, a reverse neighbors retrieves all subjects matching
with (?X,P1,O1). The second pattern is then transformed into a patterns group in where the join variable is
bounded with all results retrieved in the previous step and each resulting pattern is individually resolve. This way,
the pattern (?Y,P2,?X) is resolved through patterns (?Y,P2,Oi) in which Oi are all results obtained for the
initial pattern.
• Joins-E: are similar to the previous one but adding an unbounded predicate. They are solved by repeating the
previous operation for each predicate in the dataset.
• Joins-F: add a second unbounded predicate to the conditions of Joins-E and are resolved by performing |P|
times the operation for Joins-E.
EVALUATION
We design our experimental setup using datasets from different domains8
We experiment against state-of-the-art solutions like RDF-3X, BitMat, MonetDB, and Hexastore, but the comparisons
are only performed against the three first ones which allow larger datasets to be managed. We perform on MonetDB by
following (Sidirourgos et al., 2008): we create separated predicate tables and insert triples with a subject-object order. 
in order to obtain an heterogeneous corpora.
All of them are previously cleaned to delete duplicated triples. Their resultant properties are described in Table 1: the
column “Size” shows the original size in raw N3 format, “Triples” indicates the number of triples in the dataset and the
three latest columns show the number of different subjects, predicates and objects respectively. We choose different-size
datasets to analyze the impact of the number of triples in the results. Besides, we also consider the number of predicates
to study the main bottleneck of vertical-partitioning.
All tests are performed on ID-based representations for a fair comparison. We consider that the Dictionary is a common
structure for these approaches, hence all of them could use any competitive technique to represent it. However, compact
dictionaries are an open problem (Brisaboa, Cánovas, Martínez-Prieto and Navarro, 2011) out of the scope of this paper.
Compression
This analysis focuses on the space required to represent the Triples component of an RDF dataset. Table 2 summarizes
results for k2-triples and the remaining techniques. 
The comparison on the smallest dataset (geonames: 1GB on N3) already shows that the approaches on vertical-
partitioning achieves the most compressed representations: k2-triples and MonetDB take 0.017GB and 0.072GB. Both
techniques largely outperform the multi-indexes based solutions which require 0.569GB and 0.344GB (for BitMat and
RDF-3X respectively). These differences are kept for all datasets. Results for dbpedia are specially interesting by
considering that it is a general-purpose dataset using a large set of predicates. We firstly emphasize that BitMat
experiments on dbpedia did not finish. In turn, RDF-3X uses 9.529GB to index the dataset: this size is much greater than
the used for MonetDB and k2-triples (more than 8GB). Our approach takes ≈50% of the space used in  MonetDB. These
results demonstrate the k2-triples ability to ultra-compress RDF, outperforming the multi-index based solutions in orders
of GB. 
8 geonames, dbtune and uniprot are extracted from the BillionTriples Challenge 2010
(http://km.aifb.kit.edu/projects/btc-2010/), wikipedia is available at http://labs.systemone.at/wikipedia3
and dbpedia at http://wiki.dbpedia.org/Downloads36. 

 7
Dataset Size (GB) #Triples #Subjects #Predicates #Objects
geonames 1.00 9,415,253 2,203,561 20 3,031,664
wikipedia 6.72 47,054,407 2,162,189 9 8,268,864
dbtune 9.34 58,920,361 12,401,228 394 14,264,221
uniprot 9.11 72,460,981 12,188,927 126 9,084,674
dbpedia-en 33.12 232,542,405 18,425,128 39,672 65,200,769 
Table 1. Datasets description
Dataset N3 Size BitMat RDF-3X MonetDB k2-triples
geonames 1.00 0.569 0.344 0.072 0.017
wikipedia 6.72 1.945 1.403 0.351 0.122
dbtune 9.34 6.072 2.033 0.443 0.149
uniprot 9.11 4.227 2.279 0.544 0.080
dbpedia-en 33.12 × 9.529 1.769 0.864 
Table 2. Compression results (in GB)
Querying
We design our experimental environment on a machine AMD-Phenom™-II X4 955@3.2GHz, quad-core (4cores-
4siblings: 1thread per core), 8GB DDR2@800MHz.  All tests are performed on the dbpedia dataset and the SPARQL
queries are extracted from the log provided for the USEWOD’2011 Challenge9
Table 3 shows averaged times (in milliseconds/pattern) for simple patterns. We discard (?S,?P,?O) by considering
that this query is equivalent to a dataset dump. First, we compare against MonetDB to evaluate the performance of k2-
triples as a vertical-partitioning solution. The use of k2-trees instead of tables largely improves query times for all
patterns. This is specially significative for patterns with unbounded predicates because their resolution is the main
weakness of the vertical-partitioning systems; for instance, (S,?P,O) takes 757 seconds/pattern in MonetDB and only
20.75 milliseconds/pattern in k2-triples. These large differences are an experimental evidence of the k2-tree high-
performance for SPARQL querying.
. This means that out testbed is composed
by real user queries except for the patterns (S,P,O) which are directly extracted from the original dataset. All queries
are translated to their correspondent IDs. Note that BitMat is not considered in these tests because of it does not finish its
processing on dbpedia.
The comparison of k2-triples and RDF-3X also shows interesting conclusions. On the one hand, k2-triples is the most
efficient approach for all patterns with a given predicate. It means that the dual subject-object indexing of the k2-tree
outperforms the RDF-3X multi-indexes when the pattern binds the predicate. On the other hand, for patterns with
unbounded predicates, RDF-3X is more efficient than k2-triples. However the difference is largely reduced in comparison
to MonetDB, even outperforming RDF-3X for (S,?P,O). This fact proposes k2-triples as a real choice even when the
number of predicates grows to the order of thousands as occur in dbpedia. However, this is an extreme case as
demonstrate the other datasets which use more limited-size predicate dictionaries. In these cases, k2-triples is competitive
with respect to multi-index approaches because of the cost of managing unbounded predicates is largely reduced.
Results in Table 4 complement previous experiments. We consider additional tests to measure the k2-triples ability to
perform join queries. We follow the six-category division reported in the previous section and consider 10 join queries in
each one. All queries (also extracted from the USEWOD’2011 log) comprise two triple patterns to avoid the join
performance to be influenced by the execution of query plans. The comparison of k2-triples against MonetDB shows
similar results than for triple patterns: our approach always overcomes the performance of the vertical-partitioning on
relational tables. As we expected, times largely increase for all categories with any unbounded predicate. k2-triples gets
reasonable times for solving joins with a single unbounded predicate (B and E). However, these largely increase when the
query comprises two unbounded predicates (C and F). Note that MonetDB results are not reported for these categories
due to the very large times that it takes for their resolution. Comparisons with respect to RDF-3X join resolution
demonstrate the superiority of k2-triples for queries with no unbounded predicates. For the rest ones, RDF-3X is clearly
superior by taking advantage of its multi-index.                                                           
9 http://data.semanticweb.org/usewod/2011/challenge.html 

 8
Pattern (S,P,O) (S,P,?O) (S,?P,O) (S,?P,?O) (?S,P,O) (?S,P,?O) (?S,?P,O)
RDF-3X 26.58 45.87 47.57 34.90 33.53 2668.46 34.55
MonetDB 26.14 50.29 757448.11 677111.48 97.49 6397.92 675127.13
k2-triples 0.005 0.08 20.75 139.74 0.44 1297.49 49.92 
Table 3. Query times (in ms/pattern) for simple triple patterns 
Pattern Joins-A Joins-B Joins-C Joins-D Joins-E Joins-F
RDF-3X 122.43 81.78 58.99 68.92 4196.07 772.86
MonetDB 306.83 1691.85×103 × 60.26 1641.93×103 ×
k2-triples 97.09 126.47 3610.84 50.14 54295.54 13100.50 
Table 4. Query times (in ms/query) for join queries 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a novel compressed RDF engine (k2-triples). It stores the RDF structure in an ultra-compressed
representation which can be fully loaded and queried in main memory. This does not only result is space savings but also
in competitive query times. The experimentation presented in this paper endorses these features by showing that: 1) k2-
triples is the most effective technique in between all considered solutions; 2) k2-triples is the most efficient engine for
solving triple patterns with bounded predicates and largely outperforms vertical-partitioning when the patterns include
unbounded predicates. This achievement reinforces the vertical-partitioning opportunities as a competitive solution to
perform on datasets with moderate amount of predicates; 3) the k2-triples mechanisms for conjunctive queries take
advantage of the triples pattern resolution to obtain the best performance for joins with no unbounded predicates. 
All these experimental results propose k2-triples as a competitive solution for full-in-memory RDF engines. To agree
with its current performance, k2-triples seems the best choice for representing datasets on specific knowledge areas which
use a limited number of predicates. This fact motivates our future work which is drawn on several complementary issues.
On the one hand, a query optimizer might allow more complex conjunctive queries to be efficiently resolved. On the
other hand, we analyze k2-triples to be enhanced to support indexed access on predicates. This decision leaves the
vertical-partitioning philosophy but opens a new opportunity for ultra-compressed multi-indexes on k2-trees.
Additionally, the conversion of the current k2-tree into a dynamic data structure would allow us to face up a more
ambitious objective: the implementation of a fully-functional RDF-Store supporting not only querying but also insertion,
updating and deletion of triples in the dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is funded by the MICINN  of Spain (PGE and FEDER) TIN2009-14560-C03-02, TIN2010-21246-C02-01 and
CDTI CEN-20091048, Xunta Galicia (cofunded with FEDER) ref. 2010/17 (first and second authors), and by
MICINN ref. BES-2010-039022 (FPI program), for the ﬁrst author . MICINN TIN2009-14009-C02-02 (third and fourth
authors), Junta de Castilla y León and the European Social Fund (third author) and Institute for Cell Dynamics and
Biotechnology (ICDB), Grant ICM P05-001-F,  Mideplan, Chile (fourth author).
REFERENCES
1. Abadi, D.J. and Marcus, A. and Madden, S. and Hollenbach, K.J. (2007) Scalable Semantic Web Data Management
using Vertical Partitioning, in Proceedings of the Thirty-third Very Large Data Bases (VLDB’07), September 23-27,
Vienna, Austria, ACM Press, 411–422.
2. Álvarez, S. and Brisaboa, N. and  Ladra, S. and Pedreira, O. (2010) A Compact Representation of Graph Databases,
in Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs (MLG’10), July 24-25, Washington
DC, CO, USA, ACM Press, 18–25.
3. Atre, M. and Chaoji,V. and Zaki, M.J. and Hendler, J.A. (2010) Matrix “Bit” loaded: a scalable lightweight join
query processor for RDF data, in Proceeding f the Nineteenth International Conference on Word Wide Web
(WWW’10), April 26-30, Raleigh, NC, USA, ACM Press, 41-50.  

 9
4. Bizer, C. and Heath, T. and Berners-Lee, T. (2009) Linked Data - The Story So Far, International Journal on
Semantic Web and Information Systems, 5, 1–22.
5. Brisaboa, N. and Cánovas, R. and Claude, F., Martínez-Prieto, M.A. and Navarro, G. (2011) Compressed String
Dictionaries, to appear in Proceedings of the Tenth International Symposium on Experimental Algorithms (SEA’11),
May 5-7, Crete, Greece, LNCS-6630, Springer, 136-147.
6. Brisaboa, N. and  Ladra, S. and Navarro, G. (2009) Compact Web Graph Representation,  in Proceedings of the
Sixteenth International Symposium on String Processing and Information Retrieval (SPIRE’09), August 25-27,
Saariselkä, Finland, LNCS-5721, Springer, 18–30.
7. Fernández, J.D. and  Martínez-Prieto, M.A. and Gutiérrez, C. (2010) Compact Representation of Large RDF Data
Sets for Publishing and Exchange, in Proceedings of the Ninth International Semantic Web Conference, November
7-11, Shangai, China, LNCS-6496, Springer, 193-208.
8. Ladra. S. (2011) Algorithms and Compressed Data Structures for Information Retrieval. PhD thesis, Department of
Computer Science, University of A Coruña, Spain.
9. Neumann, T. and Weikum, G. (2010) The RDF-3X engine for scalable management of RDF data, The VLDB
Journal, 19, 1, 91-113.
10. Sidirourgos, L. and Goncalves, R.  and Kersten, M. and Nes, N. and Manegold, S. (2008) Column-Store Support for
RDF Data Management: not all Swans are White, Proceedings of VLDB Endowment, 1, 2, 1553-1563.
11. Weiss, C. and Karras, P. and Bernstein, A. (2008) Hexastore: Sextuple Indexing for Semantic Web Data
Management, Proceedings of VLDB Endowment, 1, 1, 1008-1019. 