  CATEGORIES AND CLASSES
By: Dave McComb  

Categories and Classes   1 
We’ve been working with two clients lately, both of whom are using an
ontology as a basis for their SOA messages as well as the design of their
future systems. As we’ve been building an ontology for this purpose we
became aware of a distinction that we think is quite important, we
wanted to formalize it and share it here.
In an ontology there is no real distinction that I know of between a
class and a category. That is: classes are used for categorizing, and you
categorize things into classes. If you wanted to make a distinction, it
might be that category is used more in the verb form as something you
do, and the class is the noun form.
Categories and Classes in Traditional Apps
But back in the world of traditional applications there is a quite
significant difference (although again I don’t believe this difference
has ever been elaborated). In a traditional (relational or object
oriented) application if you just wanted to categorize something, (say
by gender: male and female) you would create a gender attribute and
depending on how much control you wanted to put on its content you
would either create an enum, a lookup table or just allow anything. On
the other hand if you wanted behavioral or structural differences
between the categories (let’s say you wanted to distinguish sub
contractors from employees) you would set up separate classes or
tables  for them, potentially with different attributes and
relationships.
We’ve been studying lately what drives the cost of traditional systems,
and getting this category/class distinction right is one of the key
drivers. Here’s why: in a traditional system, every time you add a new
class you have increased the cost and complexity of the system. If you
reverse engineer the function point methodology, you’ll see that the
introduction of a new “entity” (class) is the single biggest cost driver
for an estimate. So every distinction that might have been a class, that
gets converted to a category, provides a big economic payoff.
It’s possible to overdo this. If you make something a category that
should have been a class, you end up pushing behavior into the
application code, which generally is even less tractable than the
Getting the category/class distinction right is one of
the key drivers of the cost of traditional systems. 

Categories and Classes   2
schema. So we were interested in coming up with some guidelines for
when to make a distinction a category and when to make it a class.
Category and Class in gist
As it turns out, we had foreshadowed this distinction, although not for
this reason, in gist, our upper ontology. Gist has a class called
“category” whose intent is to carry categorical distinctions (from one
lower level ontology to another) without necessarily carrying their
definitions.
For instance when we worked with a State Department of
Transportation, we had a class in their enterprise ontology called
“Roadside Feature.” A Roadside Feature has properties such as location
and when by what process it was recorded. Several of their
applications had specific roadside features, for instance “fire
hydrants.” In the application fire hydrant is a class, and therefore is
one in the application ontology. But in the enterprise ontology “fire
hydrant” is an instance of the category class. Instances of fire hydrant
are members of the roadside feature class at the enterprise ontology
level, and associated with the category “fire hydrant” via a property
“categorizedBy.” A fire hydrant can therefore be created in an
application and communicated to another application that doesn’t
know the definition of fire hydrant, with almost no loss of
information. The only thing that is lost on the receiving end is the
definition of fire hydrant, not any of the properties that had been
acquired by this fire hydrant.   

Categories and Classes   3
Category and Class, a Formal Distinction
So we came to this: a category is an intensional set with criteria for
defining membership. A class is an extensional set where membership
is explicitly asserted and specific properties can be defined as
necessary.      
In an ontology these two definitions can, and almost always do,
overlap. But in a traditional system they don’t. In a traditional system
the overlap is “the excluded middle.”     

Categories and Classes   4
This is helpful for us if we’re using our ontology to generate artifacts
for traditional systems, but on closer inspection we’re finding
interesting use even in ontology driven systems. The area in the class
rectangle outside the category box is essentially the primitive classes,
those that cannot be defined in terms of other classes and properties.
The intersecting region are classes that are formally defined, and
therefore we could infer membership. And the category outside class is
something where we accept that a distinction has been made, we may
know the sufficient properties, but we don’t necessarily know any
other necessary properties. Nor do we need to know how the individual
got categorized.
In an ontology, we focus most of our effort on the intersection: 
…these are the classes that have formal definitions. But if we think
deeply about it, what we are doing when we define a class and give it a
formal definition is: we name a class and say it is equivalent to a
restriction. The two things we traditionally haven’t focused on are
classes without definitions (primitive classes) and categories without
classes (many instance based taxonomies fit this pattern).
Our initial work suggests that this is a key pattern for getting large
constellations of ontologies to work together. Feedback, comments,
brickbats all welcome.  

11 Old Town Square
Suite 200
Fort Collins, CO 80524
970-490-2224
305-425-2224
info@semanticarts.com
© Semantic Arts, Inc.  