Cybernetics and Psychology
Robert Johannson
2020/09/20 

Psyche as Mechanism
BRAIN Stimulus
(Force)
Cause
Response
(Movement)
Effect
Mechanistic reductionism teaches that the universe consists only of
matter and energy which are deterministically controlled by forces.
Everything remains the same, until it is forced to change.  Thus everything
can be understood as a force causing a movement.
Behaviourism adopts mechanistic reductionism and argues that there is no
such thing as mind, there is only a mental mechanism, a brain. Therefore
all human behaviour can be understood as the stimulus (force) causing a
response (movement) as an effect. Therefore human behaviour can be
completely explained by the mechanism of stimulus and response. 
The scientific method is a method for testing linear causal relationships. If
the brain is merely a mechanism, it can be used to establish the formulae
that will allow the scientist to predict human behaviour, and thus establish
psychology as a science. 

Psyche as a Control System
EVALUATE
CHOOSE
ACT
SENSE 
Since these four processes form a feedback loop, a control
process is non-linear. Therefore the control process is not an
energy  process, but a communication process. It processes
information. Matter and energy are merely the media of
communication and control.
Cybernetics on the other hand views the human mind as a
control system. A control system is a decision making process,
and consists of four constituent processes. 

Models
Values
Options
Environment
Changes Perceptions
Needs Action
Sensing uses models to translate changes in the environment into perceptions.
Evaluating uses values to translate perceptions into evaluations. 
Choosing uses options to translate evaluations into action. 
Acting consists of the environment  translating actions into changes.
A Cybernetic Control System  is a Communication Process
SENSE
E
V
A
L
U
A
T
E
CHOOSE
A
C
T
A communication process translates one form of information into another.  
Models, values, options and environment are the translation processes that
constitute the program that controls the control process.  

Models
Values
Options
Environment
Changes Perceptions
Needs Action
The Psyche is the Internal Communication Process
SENSE
E
V
A
L
U
A
T
E
CHOOSE
A
C
T
Psyche
The psyche is part of the environment, but it also seeks to
change some aspect of the environment. Cybernetics
sees action (behaviour) as purposeful. It seeks to create
changes in the environment.  It is creative. 

Conscious and unconscious decision making
Unconscious decisions. Most of the decisions we make are unconscious. Our heart
beat, our breathing, our digestion, our immune response. One of the first
cybernetic studies, by Rosenbluth, was the way that the body uses feedback to
make arm movements smooth.
Because information is categorical we also use feedback to learn to make
distinctions and associations. This allows for more sophisticated and programmed
responses. The most significant of these is learning language. We learn to
distinguish between phonemes and then associate them into words, and
sentences. 
Consciousness. We can become aware of our sensory perception, our emotions, 
our actions, and our internal dialogue. 
Self-conscious or reflexive decision-making takes the process to the meta-
level. We can become aware of the programming as information and make
decisions about the translators: exploring options, researching possible
results, and defining criteria.  

Problem Solving 
Every problem is a decision waiting to be made.
What are the options expressed in the dilemma?
Models
Values
Options
Apply appropriate models.
What are the probable results of each option?
Every decision is an exercise in values clarification.     
What are the values implied by the options?
A decision will emerge.
In relating effectively to our environment we seek requisite variety in our options
(Skills, technology), realistic models (Truth),  and functional values (Ethics).  

The Negative Circle
In working with families we found that the major struggle was with emotions. 
People were overwhelmed with feelings: fear, guilt, depression, anger. 
We found that negative emotions formed a cycle. People would move
from one negative emotion to another, as though it would solve the emotion.
Fearful people would shift to blaming themselves. Guilty people would become
depressed and hopeless to escape the guilt. Depressed people would get angry at
others  to relieve the depression. But living in a world of evil people is a very
frightening thing. The negative emotions would just reinforced each other.  Each
person had their habitual spot. 
Guilt
Depression
Fear
Anger 

Love
Hope
Faith
Joy
The Positive Circle
Rather than move around the negative circle, it was necessary to move
to a positive circle that would reinforce positive emotions.
Fear is a negative view of the world. Faith is a positive view of the world.
Guilt is blaming others. Love is forgiving others.
Depression is feeling trapped. Hope is having some possibilities.
Anger is a way of being in the world. Joy is the alternative way of being in the
world. 

Models
Changes Perceived
Options Values
Depression to Hope
Hope
Depression
Models
Changes Predictions
Of the future Values Faith
Fear
Models
Changes Perceived
Causes Values Love
Guilt, Anger
Guilt and anger to love and forgiveness
Fear to faith
Our choice of models and values determine whether we look at the options
with despair, or with hope.
Our choice of models and values determine whether we look at the causes with
guilt and anger or love and forgiveness.
Our choice of models and values determine whether we look at the future
with fear, or with faith.
Emotions are the result of our models and our values. 

Options
Needs Compulsion
Depression
We can look at the traditional psychiatric disorders as breakdowns in the translation
processes.
Schizophrenia
Dysfunctional values will give us a distorted evaluation of our environment
which can be a small obsession (phobias) or an extreme distortion involving an
obsession or addiction. 
Models
Changes Perceptions
Hallucinations
Values
Perceptions Needs
Obsession
Addiction
Dysfunctional options will give us a distorted picture of our alternatives which
can be a sense that there is only one option (compulsion) or a sense that there
are no options (depression), or infinite options (mania). 
Dysfunctional models will give us a distorted picture of our environment which
can be a small distortion (climate change is a hoax) or an extreme distortion
involving hallucinations, and delusions. 
Depression 

These frequently work together as a syndrome. For example Obsessive Compulsive
Disorder.     
Model – I don’t remember locking the door.
Perception ---- Did I lock the door?     
Value – I should lock the door.
Need ---- I need to lock the door. (anxiety)     
Option – My only option is to check. That will relieve my anxiety.
Action --- Check to see if it’s locked. 
There are a number of places to intervene in the syndrome.   
A mnemonic device – take a picture of yourself locking the door. 
Change the value – it would be nice to lock the door, but I don’t have to. 
Add an option – I can ignore the lock and enjoy the anxiety.
The pharmaceutical industry recommends drugs that will dampen the anxiety 
messages.  

Communications Media
Cognitive Therapies
A great deal of work has been done on what are called cognitive or talk
therapies that use communication to work on information processing programs. 
Martin Seligman’s Positive Psychology and his work on happiness.
David Burns and Feeding Good: The New Mood Therapy
Richard Bandler and John Grinder: NLP - Neuro Linguistic Programming
Matter and energy are the media of communication. The body uses a variety
of chemicals, and electro-chemical process to act as media for biological
information. The most famous of these is DNA which is a molecule with a
valence that communicates genetic information, the genome.
The heart uses electrical impulses to control its rhythm. Surgeons can implant
a pace maker that will augment this system when it malfunctions.
Researchers are constantly finding out more sophisticated chemical messaging
systems such as the stress hormones, and the wake up hormones. The effort
to produce chemicals that would force the body to feel a certain way has
produced the popular drugs: heroin, meth-amphetamimes, cocaine.  

The End 