IDE Integrated RDF Exploration, Access and
RDF-based Code Typing with LITEQ
Stefan Scheglmann1, Ralf L¨ammel2, Martin Leinberger1, Steffen Staab1, Matthias
Thimm1, Evelyne Viegas3
1Institute for Web Science and Technologies, University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
2 The Software Languages Team, University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
3 Microsoft Research Redmond, US
Abstract. In order to access RDF data in Software development, one needs
to deal with challenges concerning the integration of one or several RDF data
sources into a host programming language. LITEQ allows for exploring an RDF
data source and mapping the data schema and the data itself from this RDF data
sourceintotheprogrammingenvironmentforeasyreusebythedeveloper.Coreto
LITEQ is a novel kind of path query language, NPQL, that allows for both exten-
sional queries returning data and intensional queries returning class descriptions.
This demo presents a prototype of LITEQ that supports such a type mapping as
well as autocompletion for NPQL queries.
1 Introduction
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is the core technology used in many
machine-readable information sources on the Web. RDF has primarily been developed
forconsumptionbyapplicationsratherthanfordirectusebyhumans.Whiletheﬂexibil-
ity of RDF facilitates the design and publication of data on the Web, it complicates the
integration of RDF data sources into applications. For example, it is almost impossible
for a developer to know the structure of the data source beforehand. Additionally, there
is an impedance mismatch between the way classes or types are used in programming
languages compared to how classes are structuring RDF data, cf. [3,2,4,1].
To address these challenges, we present LITEQ, a paradigm for querying RDF data,
mapping it for use in a host language, and strongly typing it for harvesting the full
beneﬁts of advanced compiler technology. It contains mechanisms to map RDF types
into code types and allows for embedding query expressions into a host programming
language. In addition it is developed with an autocompletion feature in mind so that the
autocompletion together with static types can be used to alleviate problems with the
unknown structure of RDF data.
Inthisdemo,wepresentaprototypeimplementingthelanguageindependentLITEQ
paradigmfortheF#[5]programminglanguage.ItbuildsontopoftheF#typeprovider1
mechanism, which makes the prototype usable in arbitrary IDEs supporting the F# lan-
guage. In this demo paper, we demonstrate the feasibility and usability of the LITEQ
prototype and its integration into an IDE like Visual Studio.
1 http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh156509.aspx

2 Accessing RDF data in Software Development
To illustrate both the challenges encountered by a developer when integrating and
reusing RDF data in a programming environment and the contributions of LITEQ, we
present some tasks which are prerequisites for working with any data source.
T1 Schema exploration: Initially the structure and the content of data sources are
unknown to the developer. In order to identify RDF types that are important for main
functionalities of a target application, the developer has to explore the data source and
gather information about selected RDF types that he later wants to access in his appli-
cation.
T2 Code type creation: Once the developer has enough information, he can design
and implement his code types and their hierarchy in the host language.
T3 Data querying: Then, the developer uses the schema information in to deﬁne
queries.
T4 Object creation and manipulation: Given the extensional queries, the developer
can retrieve RDF objects and map them into program objects as well as access and
manipulate their values.
In the conventional way, the developer could explore the Schema (T1) using a series of
SPARQL queries. He can manually write down his own code types based on the RDF
types(T2)andformulateSPARQLqueriesasplainstringsinhiscode(T3).Hecanthen
use the results of his written queries to instantiate his previously created classes and
actually work with his types (T4). There are several problems with such an approach:
Exploring a schema in SPARQL is cumbersome and requires advanced knowledge of
SPARQL. Also, creating the types in the code is a recurring task. Lastly, formulating
SPARQL queries as plain strings is problematic as errors of all kind will only surface
at runtime.
3 Node Path Query Language (NPQL)
Core to LITEQ is a novel path query language, NPQL, that combines type mapping,
data querying, and autocompletion to solve the challenges formulated in the previous
section. This query language does not stand for itself but is supposed to be embedded
into a host language (Fig. 1).
NPQL Syntax Every NPQL expression starts with an URI representing an RDF class.
Three different kind of operators allow for the traversal of the RDF schema:
(Op 1) The subtype navigation operator “O” reﬁnes the current selected RDF type to
one of its direct subclasses.
(OP 2) The property navigation operator “.” expects a property that may be reached
from the currently selected RDF type. This property is used as an edge to navigate to
the next node, which is deﬁned as the range type of that property.

Fig.1: Integrated into a host language, NPQL can be used to solve the 4 presented tasks.
(OP3)Thepropertyrestrictionoperator“/”expectsapropertyandusesthispropertyto
restrict the extension of the currently selected RDF node. However, it does not traverse
the RDF graph further2.
Using the FOAF vocabulary, an example could be the expression 1, which uses a
subtype navigation to navigate from foaf:Agent to foaf:Person and a property
navigationviathefoaf:workplaceHomepagepropertytotheﬁnalfoaf:Document
type.
foaf:AgentOfoaf:Person . workplaceHomepage (1)
NPQL Semantics: Depending on the context of use, NPQL expressions are evaluated
using one or two of the three different semantics:
(Sem 1) The extensional semantics of NPQL provides us with an evaluation function,
that evaluates an NPQL expression to a set of URIs (the extension). This semantics is
used during data querying (T4).
(Sem 2) The intensional semantics provides us with an evaluation function, that maps
an NPQL expression to an URI. This RDF type URI can be used in order to gather all
necessary information, like hierarchy and properties, and to generate the corresponding
code type. This semantics is used during code type creation (T2) but also during the
retrieval and manipulation of RDF objects (T4).
(Sem 3) The autocompletion semantics can complete suggestions for partially written
queries. This is possible, because at every step of query writing, we can give a formal
semantics of what the intensional meaning of the partially written query is. Using this,
an IDE of the host language can provide autocompletion for NPQL expressions. This is
used during schema exploration (T1) and query formulation (T3).
4 Usage in F#
To explore the schema of an RDF data source (T1), one ﬁrst creates a connection to
the store. Then, the autocompletion semantics can help the developer to understand his
2 It is a topic of our future research whether it may be of advantage to dynamically form a
description logics like anonymous class expression ex : Creature u ∃ex : hasOwner and
uses this for typing in the host programming language.

data source. Figure 2 depicts such an exploration. The connection is created using the
RDFStore object. The developer looks at the properties of foaf:Person, which is
a subtype of foaf:Agent.
Fig.2: Build-in autocompletion used for exploring a data source.
The store connection can also be used to access types from the store directly (T2).
Again, this type selection is supported by autocompletion. Figure 3 shows expressions
that create code types for foaf:Person and foaf:Organization using the in-
tensional semantics of LITEQ.
Fig.3: Intensionally evaluated queries that yield types.
Querying data (T3), like all foaf:Persons with a Skype ID can also be done
using NPQL. Figure 4 shows such a query using the property restriction to restrict the
set of all foaf:Person typed URIs to those who have a Skype ID. By applying
an extensional evaluation of the expression, a sequence of person instances is returned.
These instances are typed according to the intensional semantics.
Fig.4: Querying for all persons with a Skype ID.
The developer can also use the code types, such as the instances returned in the
statement shown in Fig. 4, to modify the data in the store (T4). Returned types, such
as shown in Fig. 3 can be used to instantiate new entities. Figure 5 depicts such an
instantiation and manipulation of a new foaf:Person. Every change made to such
an object is automatically propagated to the underlying Triplestore.
5 Implementation
The prototype shown in the screenshots is written in F# and builds on its type provider
technology. To enable the NPQL query-object and usable types, the schema of the
store is analyzed on IDE startup. Based on this analysis, the type provider can gener-
ate the classes that are necessary to integrate NPQL query expressions and intensional
types. Intensional and extensional evaluation semantics as well as mappings that con-
vert NPQL expressions to SPARQL queries are encoded in this type provider. Every
part of the query is essentially a method, adding a triple pattern to a query. The exten-

Fig.5: Creation and manipulation of a new Person instance.
sional evaluation is then implemented as a SPARQL query that includes all these triple
patterns.
Links to the current implementation, a technical report with an extended discussion
of the NPQL semantics as well as a screencast of the current LITEQ implementation,
showing the autocompletion can be found at http://west.uni-koblenz.de/
Research/systems/liteq.
6 Conclusion and further work
In this demo paper we presented an implementation of LITEQ for the F# programming
language. LITEQ allows for querying, code type creation, and data access of RDF data
from within the host language IDE and tries to alleviate the arising challenges. It fa-
cilitates a syntax-checked query language, the node path query language (NPQL) to
explore, navigate, and query unknown RDF data sources via SPARQL endpoints. The
prototypicalimplementationofLITEQmakesuseofthestrongtypesystemofF#.Thus,
type safety is guaranteed and the generated types are treated as built-in types. Due to
the origin of F# in the .NET Framework, types generated by the F# implementation of
LITEQ can be used in other .Net languages like C#.
Acknowledgements This work has been supported by Microsoft.
References
1. V. Eisenberg and Y. Kanza. Ruby on semantic web. In Serge Abiteboul, Klemens B¨ohm,
Christoph Koch, and Kian-Lee Tan, editors, ICDE2011, pages 1324–1327. IEEE Computer
Society, 2011.
2. L. Hart and P. Emery. OWL Full and UML 2.0 Compared.
http://uk.builder.com/whitepapers/0and39026692and60093347p-39001028qand00.htm,
2004.
3. A. Kalyanpur, D. J. Pastor, S. Battle, and J. A. Padget. Automatic Mapping of OWL Ontolo-
gies into Java. In SEKE2004, 2004.
4. T. Rahmani, D. Oberle, and M. Dahms. An adjustable transformation from owl to ecore. In
MoDELS2010, volume 6395 of LNCS, pages 243–257. Springer, 2010.
5. D. Syme, K. Battocchi, K. Takeda, D. Malayeri, J. Fisher, J. Hu, T. Liu, B. McNamaa,
D. Quirk, M. Taveggia, W. Chae, U. Matsveyeu, and T. Petricek. F# 3.0 — Strongly Typed
Language Support for Internet-Scale Information Sources. Technical Report MSR-TR-2012-
101, Microsoft Research, 2012.