Executable Modeling with fUML and Alf in Papyrus:
Tooling and Experiments
Sahar Guermazi, Jérémie Tatibouet, Arnaud Cuccuru,
Saadia Dhouib and Sébastien Gérard 
CEA, LIST, Laboratory of Model Driven Engineering for
Embedded Systems
P.C. 174, Gif-sur-Yvette, 91191, France
<firstname.lastname>@cea.fr
Ed Seidewitz
Model Driven Solutions
14000 Gulliver’s Trail
Bowie MD 20720, USA
ed-s@modeldriven.com
Abstract—fUML and Alf are two OMG standards dealing with
executable modeling in UML. fUML focuses on semantic aspects,
while Alf focuses on syntax. Papyrus (the UML/SysML modeler
of the Eclipse foundation) provides tool support for these two
standards. The purpose of this article is to provide the
community with feedback and lessons learned by the Papyrus
team regarding their implementation and usage of these
standards, with the perspective of domain-specific uses of the
tool. The feedback related to fUML is intended to highlight how
tool developers can leverage fUML semantics to develop user
and/or domain-specific model execution environments. The
feedback related to Alf focuses on key end-user functionality: the
combined usage of Alf and UML, with or without profiles. 
Index Terms—fUML, Alf, Model Execution, Semantics,
Simulation
I. INTRODUCTION
Papyrus1, the UML/SysML modeler of the Eclipse
foundation, provides tool support for executable UML
modeling. It includes technologies for the execution and
debugging of models, as well as editing facilities to produce
executable models more efficiently. The execution part is
handled by a plug-in called Moka2, which relies on an
implementation of the OMG standards fUML (Semantics of a
Foundational Subset for Executable UML models3) and PSCS
(Precise Semantics of UML Composite Structures4). These
specifications formalize the execution semantics of a UML
subset. The editing part relies on the OMG standard Alf
(Action Language for fUML5), with an editor and compiler for
that language. 
One of the key features of Papyrus is that it can be easily
customized to address user and/or domain-specific needs,
typically by relying on UML profiles.  This feature has been
taken into account in the development of the executable
modeling tooling, with the idea of using the fUML, PSCS and
Alf implementations as a basis. The purpose of this article is to
provide the community with feedback and lessons learned by
the Papyrus team regarding their implementation and usage of
these standards, with the perspective of domain-specific uses of
the tool.
1 https://eclipse.org/papyrus/ 
2 https://wiki.eclipse.org/Papyrus/UserGuide/ModelExecution
3 http://www.omg.org/spec/FUML/ 
4 http://www.omg.org/spec/PSCS/ 
5 http://www.omg.org/spec/ALF/ 
Section II focuses on semantic aspects and discusses
challenges we faced for the design and implementation of
fUML-based execution engines. Section III focuses on
syntactic aspects and discusses various use cases and strategies
for combining the use of Alf and UML, including its profiles.
Section IV briefly discusses how our implementation
challenges have been considered in the implementation of other
Eclipse-based tooling. Section V concludes the paper and
highlights some perspectives of our work. 
II. DESIGNING FUML-BASED EXECUTION ENGINES
One of the main goals of Moka is to provide a generic
execution environment for Papyrus, in a way that is reusable
for any user or domain-specific use of the modeling tool. Moka
is based on a straightforward implementation of the fUML
execution model (i.e., we basically implemented the interpreter
described in this specification) so that any domain-specific
flavor of Papyrus/Moka mostly comes down to a specialization
of the fUML execution model for that domain. Since this
model is object oriented, a specialization relies on typical
mechanisms such as class inheritance and polymorphism. 
The numerous experiments made by the authors in this area
have highlighted four major concerns regarding the design of
fUML-based execution engines: Extensibility, control and
observability, time support, and connectivity with external
tools. They are discussed in the following sub-sections, as well
as the fUML-specific solutions used or developed by the
authors to address them. Concrete use cases are mentioned for
illustration purposes and potential limitations are highlighted. It
is important to note that our use of Moka is mostly simulation
oriented. Other uses (e.g., code generation and deployment)
would probably require alternative solutions or implementation
strategies [11], [12].
A. Extensibility
Problem statement: A DSL implemented as a UML
profile may require abstract syntax elements (with their own
execution semantics) that are out of the scope of the fUML
subset (e.g., composite structures, state machines). It may also
introduce stereotypes specializing fUML syntax and semantics.
These new semantics must be taken into account by a fUML-
based execution tool.
3

Key fUML aspects: The fUML execution model is
designed following the Visitor design pattern. Each
(executable) element of the fUML abstract syntax is associated
with a semantic visitor that describes its execution semantics. A
factory (the so-called ExecutionFactory) is responsible for
instantiating the appropriate visitors when an execution is
started. Another factory (the so-called Locus) is responsible for
instantiating objects, which represent instances of Classes
specified in the model.
Proposed solution: According to this architecture, a
natural way of building a domain-specific extension of the
execution model is to introduce additional semantic visitors
(either new visitors or extensions of existing ones), as well as
extensions of the two factories. These visitors should capture
the semantics of non-fUML abstract syntax elements, and/or
account for the application of stereotypes. 
Experiments: This extension strategy was successfully
applied for specifying and implementing the execution model
of OMG’s PSCS, a normative extension of fUML dealing with
the semantics of UML composite structures (and to which the
authors have strongly contributed), including informative
annexes on the semantics of a subset of the MARTE and
SysML profiles. Following the same strategy, a systematic
approach for specifying the execution semantics of UML
profiles has been proposed in [9], as an increment to
preliminary proposals developed in [2]. 
Limitations: The limitations are mainly related to the
extension capabilities of the semantic model. The first
limitation is introduced by the inhomogeneity of the usage of
the factory pattern. When not used, this pattern implies that a
visitor may have to embed redundant code. A typical example
can be extracted from PSCS semantic model. The visitor
CS_AddStructuralFeatureValueAction (PSCS specification,
subclause 8.2.2.2.1) has to duplicate the code of the doAction
operation inherited from a fUML visitor. This was due to the
instantiation of links that was not handled via the factory
pattern. A similar observation can be made in the case of
Reference instantiation.
The second limitation is related to the capacity of the
interpreter to work in presence of multiple profile applications.
This usually implies that model elements have multiple
stereotypes applied, each one with a particular semantics.
While it is feasible to capture their semantics within semantic
model extensions, it is not, for the moment, possible to
combine different visitors during runtime in order to interpret a
single model element. 
B. Control and Observability
Problem statement: Modern execution and simulation
tools should provide users with facilities to control (start/stop,
suspend/resume, step by step, etc.) and observe (diagram
animation, tracing) executions, for debugging purposes or
simply to ease understanding of modeled systems. 
Key fUML aspects: These tooling concerns are out of the
scope of the fUML specification, since the execution model is
fundamentally meant to enforce partial execution orders, and
not to provide any strict recommendations on how this should
be implemented. These execution orders are constrained by
token propagation rules (semantics of Activities), where tokens
flow (potentially concurrently) as long as they can through
activity nodes and edges. The resulting causality must be
respected by any compliant execution tool.
Proposed solution: In order to provide control and
observation facilities, a fUML-based execution engine needs to
reroute the usual token propagation flow through control and
observation entities, in order to let them operate appropriately
on the execution. This should be done in a way that preserves
the original causality. The rerouting can be managed by
specific semantic visitors, introduced using the extension
mechanisms described in section II.A.
Experiments: This generic principle has been used to
establish a connection between the fUML execution engine of
Moka and the Eclipse Debug framework. For example, the
semantics of activity nodes (captured by visitor
ActivityNodeActivation) has been overloaded so that, when
they receive offered tokens (operation receiveOffer), the
control is rerouted towards an external control entity. The
rerouting is done before the execution of the node is actually
fired, as per the normative fUML semantics. This control entity
is responsible for the management of debugging events (e.g.,
the user has stopped or suspended the execution, a breakpoint
has been encountered) as well as the animation of nodes on
diagrams. 
In another experiment, the same delegation mechanism has
been used to produce execution traces, by rerouting through a
tracing entity. These traces have been used to check the
correctness of fUML models with respect to higher-level
models of reference scenarios [1]. We are currently refining
this work in order to connect with the Papyrus model-based
tracing framework. This framework allows adding, deleting
and displaying static trace points on UML model elements.
Trace points are used by Moka to identify the places where the
execution flow has to be routed to the tracing entity. Execution
traces are then generated in the CTF format6, enabling
visualization and analysis in the Eclipse Trace Compass Tool7. 
Limitations: The approach implies a pollution of the
semantics with statements dedicated to the control derivation.
In addition, it currently lacks a systematic methodology for
identifying the points where control needs to be extracted, so
that a good deal of expertise on the semantic model is required
to make these identifications.
C. Time Support
Problem statement: As suggested by the various
experiments mentioned in the previous sections, fUML can be
used as a basis for a simple simulation process (model, execute,
observe, and refine). It can be sufficient in the case where
simulation objectives only concern logical correctness of the
system. However, system designers usually have to account
also for extra-functional aspects, which need to be reflected
during experiments. Time is a common example of an extra-
functional property that needs to be taken into account.                                                           
6 http://www.efficios.com/ctf 
7 https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/tools.tracecompass 
4

Key fUML aspects: As explained in the fUML
specification (subclause 2.4), “The execution model is agnostic
about the semantics of time. This allows for a wide variety of
time models to be supported, including discrete time (such as
synchronous time models) and continuous (dense) time.
Furthermore, it does not make any assumptions about the
sources of time information and the related mechanisms,
allowing both centralized and distributed time models”.
Implementations are thereby responsible to provide timing
mechanisms if needed.
Proposed solution: In widespread simulation tools and
frameworks such as Ptolemy II and SystemC, time is usually
managed by an explicit control entity (scheduler-like), which
appropriately schedules the execution of the various model
elements in order to reflect the timing aspects. For the reasons
mentioned above, the fUML execution model does not include
such a control entity. Nevertheless, the delegation mechanism
described in section II.B can be used to reroute the usual fUML
execution flow towards a scheduler. The extension mechanisms
described in section II.A can also be used to introduce new
visitors, responsible for interpreting time-related information
specified in a model, in connection with the scheduler. 
Experiments: In [10], a discrete event (DE) scheduler for
fUML models has been designed, along with a usage
methodology to perform DE simulation with fUML models. In
ongoing work, these mechanisms have been put into practice in
an extension of the fUML execution model for the simulation
of timed BPMN models. The extensions account for the
duration of tasks as well as the occurrence of timed events.
Once fired, tasks (which are modeled as Actions in an Activity)
produce their output tokens only when allowed by the DE
scheduler, after their simulated duration has elapsed. Similarly,
timed events are triggered only when their simulated
occurrence date is reached. This prototype was demonstrated at
Eclipse Conference France 20158.
Limitations: Drawbacks are essentially the same as for the
control delegation approach, since we rely on this mechanism.
In addition, we only experimented on the integration of the
discrete event time model. Other experiments are required to
determine if the approach is valid for other time models.
D. Connectivity with external tools
Problem statement: Complex systems are usually
composed of different parts that all relate to different kinds of
engineering disciplines (mechanical, electrical, computer
science). The consequence is that the various parts of the
system are usually built using different modeling tools and
modeling languages, with their own simulation environments.
A co-simulation approach is usually required to assess the
correctness of the overall system model. A fUML-based
simulation tool must support this use case. 
Key fUML aspects: The fUML subset includes Classes
and opaque behaviors. The semantics of Classes are defined by
the Object visitor. An Object represents a Class instance at
runtime, and it is responsible for handling operation calls and
signal receptions.  The semantics of OpaqueBehavior are
8 https://youtu.be/ddogjaCtEbE
captured by the OpaqueBehaviorExecution visitor, which is
abstract. Each OpaqueBehavior needs to be hooked to a
concrete OpaqueBehaviorExecution implementing its own
semantics. Specialized Object and OpaqueBehaviorExecution
implementations can be used to communicate with external
tools. 
Proposed solution: The opening of Moka and fUML to
external tools and libraries entirely relies on the principal of
model signatures. It consists in capturing (using classes and
opaque behaviors) the interfaces provided by external tools and
libraries within fUML models. Moka then provides extension
points to associate these signatures with actual visitor
implementations. At runtime, when a call to an opaque
behavior is made, the semantic visitor implementing its
behavior drives the execution flow to logic that enables the
connection to a specific tool or library. Similar logic is set up
when operations are called on an instance of a Class
representing the interface of an external tool.
Experiments: This solution has been put into practice for
implementing the primitive behaviors defined in the normative
foundational model library. The same principle has been used
to establish connection with external graphical rendering tools9.
We are currently reusing the same approach in connection with
FMI (Functional Mockup Interface), a standard dedicated to
co-simulation10. The idea is to enable a co-simulation between
heterogeneous models within Moka. The global system to be
simulated is organized as a set of FMUs (Functional Mockup
Units, which represent simulation components) that are
interconnected. The evolution of the system is governed at
runtime by a so-called “master algorithm” expressed in Alf.
When accessing an FMU, the master calls operations. These
calls result in interaction with the FMU using the FMI API.
Limitations: The principle for connecting with external
tools or libraries is well established. Nevertheless its coupling
with the FMI standard for co-simulation is still a work in
progress. Limitations may come to light as we go further in the
implementation.
In this section of the paper, we have discussed how the
fUML semantic model (and its implementation in Moka) could
be reused for the development of user and/or domain-specific
execution engines. The next section focuses on syntactic
aspects. It discusses the combined usage of Alf and UML, and
the related implementation challenges we are facing.
III. COMBINING ALF AND UML (AND ITS PROFILES…)
In order to become actually executable, a fUML model may
need to be very detailed. Unfortunately, activity diagrams (the
standard graphical notation for UML Activities) quickly
become unreadable as the number of nodes and edges
increases. Alf provides a concise textual syntax to address this
problem, which can be compiled into equivalent executable
fUML models. Examples (developed using Papyrus tool
support for Alf) are described in [8].
9  https://youtu.be/SdDPl4HQ1n4
10 https://www.fmi-standard.org/ 
5

While Alf brings a lot of flexibility to specify executable
models, it was not intended to replace the diagrammatic syntax
associated with UML. Indeed, diagrams are perfectly usable to
represent the structural description of a system or high-level
behaviors. What final users really expect is to be able to
combine both notations (i.e. textual and diagrammatic). The
choice of one or the other is driven by the level of detail
required by the model or model element being specified.  The
combined usage of Alf and UML graphical notation has
already been experienced by the Papyrus team. The following
subsections describe the various use cases we found.
A. Combining at Unit Level
Problem statement: Graphical notations are useful for
capturing the high-level aspects of a system, such as
architectures of Classes, decompositions of Classes into parts,
or signatures of Operations. Textual notations are useful to go
deeper into the details of these elements, such as for the
implementation of Operations. It shall be possible to combine
the two kinds of notation in order to benefit from both worlds.
Key Alf aspects: Alf and UML can be combined at the
“unit level”. Alf units are equivalent to text files containing
code. A unit typically contains a namespace definition, which
can textually specify a Package, Class, Datatype, Enumeration,
Signal, Association or Activity. From the user standpoint, this
means it is possible to use Alf to fully describe such elements,
whether they appear on diagrams or not. The advantage of
using Alf at this level is that it offers a compact view of nested
namespaces, which can be easily updated without having to go
through several diagrams. 
Proposed solution: The combination principle is to
serialize Alf units as textual representations for UML
namespaces. This is done by attaching stereotyped comments
to namespaces (using the TextualRepresentation stereotype
introduced in the Alf specification). Comments simply contain
the Alf text body.
Experiments: We used Alf at the unit level in the test-suite
model of OMG’s PSCS, to specify almost all the Activities it
contains, while keeping (composite) Class definitions in regular
UML parts. The result is an executable model comprising a set
of test cases, including assertions describing how the model
should behave according to PSCS semantics. A tool can
demonstrate conformance with the specification if no assertion
is violated when executing the test suite. The test suite contains
hundreds of Activities, so that, without Alf, it could not have
been produced within the time frame of the joint submission
preparation (~ 2 years).
Limitations: The main limitation of Alf for coupling at the
unit level is related to its scope, which is limited to fUML. As
highlighted in the work on PSCS, the subset of UML syntax
covered by PSCS is larger than the fUML one. Consequently
the design of the test suite implied the use of elements (e.g.
ports) that are not supported in the context of Alf (only aligned
with fUML). For example, the sending of a signal through a
specific Port cannot be specified in Alf. Therefore, some of the
test cases had to be refined manually after compilation of the
Alf specification. Similar problems will certainly arise during
the specification of the test suite for PSSM (Precise Semantics
of UML State Machines). This illustrates the significance of
aligning Alf simultaneously with the other parts of UML that
have or will have their semantics formalized. Alf therefore
needs to evolve beyond fUML. This evolution is being planned
by the Executable UML Working Group within OMG.
B. Combining at Expression and Statement Level
Problem statement: In the context of a UML model, a typed
expression language can be used any place an expression is
required, such as in default values for properties of a classifier,
lower and upper bounds of a multiplicity, or specification of
constraints. UML tools like BridgePoint and RSA include this
kind of functionalities, with the Object Action Language
(OAL)11 and the Unified Action Language (UAL)12,
respectively. Similarly, these tools also allow the specification
of textual behavior statements locally, such as for the effects of
a state machine transition or the method of a Class operation.
These facilities greatly simplify executable modeling. Similar
facilities should be supported by Alf-based tools.
Key Alf aspects: Alf syntax, as given in the OMG
specification, is specifically designed to allow integration at the
expression and statement level (as discussed at the beginning of
Clauses 8 and 9, respectively, of the specification document). 
Proposed solution: While the Alf specification was
designed with this use case in mind, we have been facing issues
due to our monolithic Xtext implementation of the grammar. In
this implementation, Expression and Statement rules are not
root rules, and type inference, validation, and compiling
mechanisms are implemented specifically for this architecture
of rules. Using expressions and statements in a context that is
not planned by the grammar implementation requires an
extension of these mechanisms, which is a complex task. The
solution that we are currently prototyping consists in reducing
the problem to an Alf/UML combination at unit level (as
discussed in section III.A), with additional tool API for the
derivation of the validation context. 
Experiments: Regarding expressions, we are currently
experimenting with the local editing of guards on transitions
and default values of properties. We rely on the fact that UML
OpaqueExpressions (i.e., a UML facility to embed textual
expressions in a model) can have an associated behavior (this
behavior specifies the result that should be obtained by
evaluating the opaque expression, no matter what language it is
specified in). From the tooling standpoint, the idea is to embed
Alf-based editors directly into UML diagrams (with a content
limited to the expression being edited), and serialize the Alf
expression as an Alf unit for the Activity specifying the
OpaqueExpression. Once correctly serialized (which typically
requires the production of an extra return statement), and the
validation context correctly determined using the tool API, the
Alf unit can be validated as per usual Alf validation rules. 
Regarding statements, we are experimenting with the local
editing of effects on transitions and entry/do/exit behaviors on
states. The solution is more straightforward, and it is directly
applicable in any place where a Behavior (and therefore an                                                           
11 http://www.ooatool.com/docs/OAL08.pdf 
12 https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/community/ual.pdf 
6

Activity) can be specified. The embedded editor only shows
the edited statements, while directly dealing with the
serialization in the Alf unit corresponding to the edited
Activity. 
Limitations: This solution is a kind of workaround. A more
permanent approach might be to refactor the Xtext
implementation of the grammar into something more modular.
Further investigations are however required to determine the
feasibility of this modular approach (realizations made in the
Xtext community around Xbase13 suggest that it would be
feasible), as well as its development cost. 
C. Combining with profiles
Problem statement: Profiles can be used to implement
DSLs on a UML basis. As shown in the examples of section
II.A, these UML-based DSLs might be executable, so that the
question of the use of Alf in the context of profiled UML
models naturally arises. 
Key Alf aspects: This use of Alf is considered in the OMG
specification. The support in terms of stereotype application is
however relatively limited. Alf stereotypes can only have
attributes that are typed with primitive types or one attribute
typed by a meta-class. In addition, stereotype attributes that are
typed by a primitive type can only have a single value.
Proposed solutions: The proposed solution consists in
extending the syntax, validation and compiling rules of Alf,
consistently with the abstract syntax and the semantics of the
considered UML profile.
Experiments: In [5] we have studied a refactoring of the
Value Specification Language (VSL) as an extension of Alf.
VSL has been standardized in the context of the UML profile
for Modeling and Analysis of Real-Time and Embedded
systems (MARTE)14. The main rationale for VSL was to
provide users from the real-time domain with a simple textual
syntax for specifying the values of non-functional properties of
their system models. In VSL, rules for producing typed
expressions mainly address aspects that are not specific to the
real-time domain. They are related to general-purpose concerns
that are also considered by Alf. Our proposal consisted in
properly defining VSL as an extension of Alf, focusing on the
aspects of VSL that are valuable for the real-time domain, and
thereby leveraging the Alf specification and implementation. In
a proof-of-concept implementation, we demonstrated how Alf
syntax and validation rules could be extended for that purpose.
The experiments were limited to the Expression subset of Alf.
Limitations: While the feasibility of the approach has been
demonstrated, its applicability is limited by our current Xtext
implementation of the Alf language and the fact that it is
monolithic (as discussed in section III.B). The parts that would
need to be extended or specialized for a particular domain
cannot be easily extracted. More generally, Alf is a complex
language, so that any extension (from both syntactic and
semantic standpoints) should be considered with great care and
may require a lot of development effort. It is not clear today if
such extensions of Alf should be encouraged, and if evolution                                                           
13 https://wiki.eclipse.org/Xbase 
14 http://www.omg.org/spec/MARTE/ 
in the specification or implementation could make such
extensions easier and safer.
IV. RELATED WORK
We have built a modeling and simulation tool based on the
OMG standards fUML, PSCS and Alf. During the definition of
this tool, we identified challenges (extensibility, control, time
support and connectivity with external tools) related to the use
of the fUML standard for simulation, and we proposed
solutions for them. In the literature, we have selected two tools
that, by construction, should address challenges similar or very
close to those we identified: Moliz15 and Gemoc Studio16.
These tools have been selected either for their strong link with
fUML (Moliz) or their Eclipse-based implementation (both
tools). It would have been interesting to consider the Cameo
Simulation Toolkit17 (fUML based) as well. However, since
this is a commercial tool, we could not have access to the
implementation and make relevant comparisons. We discuss in
the following sections how these tools address the challenges
we identified.
A. Extensibility
Domain specific languages are expressed with UML using
profiles. To capture the semantics of these languages, we
proposed a systematic approach to extend the fUML semantic
model with new visitors. Moliz and Gemoc do not consider
profiles. However they both address the definition of the
semantics of MOF-based domain specific languages. Moliz
uses fUML to define the semantics [7] while Gemoc uses
Kermeta [4]. 
B. Control and observability
During simulation, we needed to be able to observe the
execution to make it easier to understand a model. To do so, we
proposed delegating, at specific points, the control of the
execution flow to a particular entity (e.g. a debugger) to enable
the control of the execution.
Moliz and Gemoc propose a similar approach. They both
have a connection with a debugging environment based on the
control-delegation principle.  Furthermore, both tools use this
approach to connect with trace generators (specific to fUML in
the case of Moliz [6] and specific to each DSML in the case of
Gemoc [4]). These two tools share an implementation approach
based on aspect-oriented programming, which could be
interesting for addressing the limitation we have identified (i.e.,
identification of control delegation point, as discussed in
section II.B).
C. Time support
Time is a key aspect in simulation that is unfortunately not
directly supported in fUML. To introduce time support, we
relied on the control-delegation approach, with a control entity
responsible for the evolution of time and the scheduling of the
execution.                                                           
15 http://www.modelexecution.org/
16 http://gemoc.org/studio/ 
17 http://www.nomagic.com/products/cameo-simulation-toolkit.html
7

Moliz does not directly provide a solution to capture time
semantics during model execution. However it proposes a
framework (i.e., a library) [3] for performance analysis that
enables the integration of time representation in execution
traces. Nevertheless, the approach seems to be also limited to
discrete-event time models.
Gemoc enables time support in simulation thanks to clocks
defined in CCSL (Clock Constraint Specification Language)
[4]. The approach is interesting in the sense that it can combine
various time models. However, using it in the context of fUML
is not straightforward, since the approach makes strong
assumptions about the way the syntax and semantics of a
language are defined.
D. Connectivity with external tools
One important feature of Moka is to be open to external
tools. This possibility is made possible by extending specific
visitors of the fUML semantic model, whose implementation
enables programmatically the connection with external tool. As
far as we know, neither Moliz nor Gemoc provide comparable
features. 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
The Papyrus team is developing an open-source modeling and
simulation framework based on standards. The goal of this
platform is to support modeling and simulation of models
described either with general-purpose languages or domain-
specific languages.
The developed platform is composed of two parts.  The first
one enables the specification of executable models using Alf.
The second one enables the execution of these models based on
semantics defined by fUML and PSCS. 
This paper was organized around these two aspects (cf.
section II and III). It reports our use of the standards Alf and
fUML as well as the limitations we encountered when using
them. We identified two kinds of limitation: those that are
related to the tooling of a standard and those that are related to
the standard itself.
In the context of fUML, the limitation related to
connectivity with other tools is really a tool issue. However
those concerning extensibility, control delegation and time
support are issues of the standard. The one related to
extensibility seems to require a small refinement of the
semantic model. Nevertheless this is not the case for the one
related to control delegation. Indeed the model of computation
of fUML is deeply coupled with the semantics definition and it
will surely be painful work to extract it. In the context of Alf,
the limitations attributed to the standard are only related to the
support of profiles. The other limitations are really introduced
by the initial version of the tooling that was implemented. For
instance, to nicely integrate Alf at the expression level with
UML some part of the tooling will need to improved.
The issues that are related to the standards are going to be
addressed by the Executable UML Working Group in the near
future. Technological improvements resulting from these
refinements of the standards will be integrated in the further
development of our tooling.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Arnaud, B. Bannour, A. Cuccuru, C. Gaston, S. Gerard,
and A. Lapitre. Timed symbolic testing framework for
executable models using high-level scenarios. In Complex
Systems Design & Management (CSDM), pages 269-282, 2015.
[2] A. Benyahia, A. Cuccuru, S. Taha, F. Terrier, F. Boulanger,
and S. Gérard. Extending the standard execution model of UML
for real-time systems. In Distributed, Parallel and Biologically
Inspired Systems (DIPES), pages 43-54, 2010.
[3] L. Berardinelli, P. Langer, and T. Mayerhofer. Combining
fUML and profiles for non-functional analysis based on model
execution traces. In Quality of Software Architectures (QoSA),
pages 79-88, 2013.
[4] B. Combemale, J. Deantoni, O. Barais, A. Blouin, E.
Bousse, C. Brun, T. Degueule, and D. Vojtisek. A Solution to
the TTC’15 Model Execution Case Using the GEMOC Studio.
2015. Unpublished.
[5] A. Cuccuru, S. Gérard, and F. Terrier. Defining Marte’s
VSL as an extension of Alf. In MoDELS’11, pages 699-713,
2011.
[6] T. Mayerhofer, P. Langer, and G. Kappel. A runtime model
for fUML. In Models@Run.Time, pages 53-58, 2012.
[7] T. Mayerhofer, P. Langer, M. Wimmer, and G. Kappel.
xMOF: Executable DSMLs based on fUML. In SLE’13, pages
56-75, 2013.
[8] E. Seidewitz and A. Cuccuru. Agile programming with
executable models: An open-source, standards-based Eclipse
environment. In Systems, Programming, and Applications:
Software for Humanity, SPLASH ’14, pages 39-40, 2014. 
[9] J. Tatibouet, A. Cuccuru, S. Gérard, and F. Terrier.
Formalizing execution semantics of UML profiles with fUML
models. In MODELS 2014, pages 133-148, 2014.
[10] J. Tatibouet, A. Cuccuru, S. Gérard, and F. Terrier.
Towards a systematic, tool-independent methodology for
defining the execution semantics of UML profiles with fUML.
In MODELSWARD 2014, pages 182–192, 2014.
[11] G. Dévai, G.F. Kovács, and Á. An. Textual, executable,
translatable UML. In OCL 2014, pages 3–12, 2014.
[12] Z. Micskei, R-A. Konnerth, B. Horvath, O. Semerath, A.
Voros, and D. Varro. On Open Source Tools for Behavioral
Modeling and Analysis with fUML and Alf. In OSS4MDE
2014, pages 31–41, 2014.
8