Ontology-Based Process Modelling -
Will we live to see it?
Carl Corea1, Michael Fellmann2, and Patrick Delfmann1
1 University of Koblenz-Landau, Germany
{ccorea,delfmann}@uni-koblenz.de
2 University of Rostock, Germany
michael.fellmann@uni-rostock.de
Abstract. In theory, ontology-based process modelling (OBPM) bares
great potential to extend business process management. Many works
have studied OBPM and are clear on the potential amenities, such as
eliminating ambiguities or enabling advanced reasoning over company
processes. However, despite this approval in academia, a widespread in-
dustry adoption is still nowhere to be seen. This can be mainly attributed
to the fact, that it still requires high amounts of manual labour to ini-
tially create ontologies and annotations to process models. As long as
these problems are not addressed, implementing OBPM seems unfeasi-
ble in practice. In this work, we therefore identify requirements needed
for a successful implementation of OBPM and assess the current state of
research w.r.t. these requirements. Our results indicate that the research
progress for means to facilitate OBPM are still alarmingly low and there
needs to be urgent work on extending existing approaches.
Keywords: Ontology-Based Process Modelling · Ontologies · Research
Agenda
1 Introduction
In the scope of Business Process Management, process models have evolved as
central artifacts for the design, enactment and analysis of company processes [62].
Many modelling languages, such as the Business Process Model and Notation3,
are available and have received widespread adoption in practice. While these
standards oﬀer support for the representation of company processes, the actual
content of the model is still the responsibility of the modeller. That is, process
models are designed by human modellers, often times also in a collaborative
and incremental manner. In this setting, modelling errors can occur frequently
[46,19]. For example, humans might accidentally model a non-compliant sequence
of activities or use ambiguous activity labels.
To conquer such modelling problems, there is a broad consensus in academia
that business process models should be extended with an additional conceptual
3 https://www.omg.org/bpmn/
arXiv:2107.06146v1 
[cs.AI]  12 Jul 2021

2 C. Corea et al.
layer, namely ontologies [19]. Ontologies are artifacts that can be used to formally
conceptualize a domain of interest [11]. As shown in Figure 1, ontology-based
process models can thus be created by extending process models with ontologies,
which allows to deﬁne unambiguous semantics of process models and create a
shared understanding of business processes for humans and machines alike. To
clarify, the ontologies addressed in this works are limited to models that are
coded in description logics, e.g., OWL-ontologies linked to process models.
Process Model
2
Corea, Delfmann - Detecting Compliance
Ontology
Fig.1: Exemplary Ontology-Based Process Model.
Many works have discussed the potential beneﬁts of OBPM, e.g. eliminat-
ing ambiguous process descriptions or advanced compliance reasoning using
ontology-based reasoning [19,11]. Still, industry adoptions are sparse. Based on
reports such as [46], this can be mainly attributed to the problems in creating
the ontology-based process models themselves. First, ontologies must initially
be created. As this requires a high expertise in knowledge representation, this
is currently still a diﬃcult task for companies. Second, even given an ontology,
the ontology has to be annotated to the process model. As ﬁnding the connec-
tions between ontology- and process model elements is a complex task, manual
annotation can be seen as highly unfeasible in practice [46].
While there have been works proposing initial means for the problems raised
above, the lack of industry adoptions suggests that companies need more support
in implementing OBPM. In this report, we therefore investigate what methods
and results are still missing to support companies in implementing OBPM and
leverage industry adoption. Here, our contributions are as follows:
• Requirements for OBPM. We identify requirements needed for success-
fully implementing and maintaining ontology-based process models for com-
panies.
• Literature Analysis. We identify the state-of-the-art of OBPM research
based on a literature review and assess to which extent current results sup-
port the identiﬁed requirements.
• Research Agenda. We identify current research gaps and distill a research
agenda to guide future research and tool development.
This work is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide preliminaries and
raise requirements for implementing OBPM. In Section 3, we analyze the state-

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 3
of-the-art on OBPM research and identify research gaps, from which we distill
a corresponding research agenda in Section 4. We conclude in Section 5.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Ontology-Based Process Models
Ontology-based process models [56] allow to deﬁne the semantics of business pro-
cess model elements by extending traditional process models with an additional
ontology-layer. To this aim, elements of business process models can be anno-
tated to ontology concepts via mappings, also referred to as semantic annotation
[20,46]. This creates a shared conceptual and terminological understanding and
deﬁnes a machine-accessible semantics of company processes.
Figure 1 shows an exemplary ontology-based process model. A company on-
tology can be used to deﬁne important company knowledge, e.g., concepts such
as organizational units, tasks, services or business rules. These ontology concepts
can then be annotated to elements of the process model [56]. Technically, this is
performed by creating axiomatical knowledge in the ontology, i.e., instances of
ontology concepts, which each represent a process model element. In this way,
the semantics and relations of the process model elements can be formalized.
Regarding ontology-based process models, the potential advantages are clear
from an academic standpoint [19,46,12,34,26,56]. Such artifacts foster a shared
semantic understanding for humans and machines and allow for advanced reason-
ing capabilities over process models for companies. Still, a widespread industry
adoption cannot be observed. As this could be attributed to companies having
problems implementing OBPM, we therefore investigate requirements of imple-
menting OBPM in the following to gain an understanding about whether there
could be any obstacles impeding industry adoption.
2.2 Requirements for implementing OBPM
On a high-level, implementing OBPM can be distinguished into ensuring three
components: an ontology, a process model and a mapping between the ontology
and the process model. This might seem trivial, however, to anticipate the results
of our literature analysis, there was no approach that supported companies in
creating and maintaining all three of these components. For example, virtually
all existing approaches assume “ready-to-go” ontologies that can be used as a
basis for extending process models. Here, following works such as [24], we argue
that this assumption might not be plausible in an enterprise setting, an rather,
companies must also be supported in the initial creation of ontologies (R1). Also,
following woks such as [46], both the ontology- and process model labels should
be initially standardized, as a basis for extending process models (R2).
Furthermore, companies must be able to create mapping of ontologies and
process models. Here, there is a broad consensus that companies should be sup-
ported by means of mapping- and annotation techniques (R3) [46,12].

4 C. Corea et al.
When mappings are created, these mappings between ontology concepts and
process model element have to be checked for plausibility. A problem here is that
the mappings are mostly created based on terminological similarity between
ontology concepts and process model elements. This however means that the
semantic contexts of these elements are mostly disregarded, which in turn can
lead to implausible mappings. For instance, consider the example in Figure 2.
On the ontology level, the company has deﬁned departments and activities,
both of which are mutually exclusive. Furthermore, we see a specialized review
department. Given a linguistic-based mapping approach matches the ontology
concept Review department with the activity Review department (this would be
highly sensible based on various linguistic-based similarity measures), this would
result in a case where a process element is both an activity and a department,
which, as deﬁned in the ontology, is not possible.
#Department
#ReviewDepartment
#Activity
#a1 Review
department
mutually 
exclusive
……
Fig.2: Exemplary linguistic-based annotation leading to incoherent mappings.
Thus, while the mapping might be sensible from a terminological viewpoint,
from a global perspective, the ontology-based process model is inconsistent, i.e.,
it cannot be instantiated. In the ﬁeld of ontology matching, this problem is re-
ferred to as mapping incoherence (i.e., mappings that induce inconsistencies)
and is widely acknowledged as a challenging task [40]. Further challenges are
also mappings that are simply implausible in a real-life sense, e.g., mapping a
process model activity from a sales process to an ontology concept describing a
purchase process if they have similar labels. An annotation veriﬁcation is there-
fore necessary during modelling to ensure the plausibility of annotations (R4).
Soundness checks are especially relevant in the scope of model evolution. For
instance, given an annotated process model, if either the underlying ontology
or process is edited, the corresponding counterpart should be altered as well
to ensure consistent co-evolution. Here, companies need to be supported in co-
evolving ontologies and process models in a synchronized manner through an
automatic application of change patterns, e.g. deleting something in the ontology
if a corresponding element is deleted in the process model (R5).
Only if the requirements R1-R5 are met, the ontology-based process model
can and should be used for ontology-based reasoning. For example, the process
model can be veriﬁed for compliance by means of ontology-based reasoning (R6).
Withal, an important requirement of implementing OBPM is that the ca-
pabilities w.r.t. R1-R6 have to be tailored to the skill set of the stakeholders
involved in the respective companies’ business process managament. Otherwise,
it cannot be ensured that the technical capabilities can even be used correctly.

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 5
Therefore, an important aspect of implementing OBPM are means for assessing
the actual usability of the underlying technical capabilities (R7).
Consequently, we raise the following requirements for implementing OBPM:
R1. Ontology Support: Support to create ontologies.
R2. Terminological Standardization: Support to standardize ontologies and
process models.
R3. Annotation Support: Support to create semantic annotations.
R4. Annotation Veriﬁcation: Support to verify soundness (consistency, plau-
sibility) of annotations.
R5. Evolution Support: Support to further evolve and maintain ontology-
based models (in a synchronized manner).
R6. Ontology-based reasoning: Support to exploit the ontology-based pro-
cess model, e.g., reasoning about process model, ontology-based recommen-
dations during modelling.
R7. Use Case and Contextual Fit: The implemented means for OBPM must
be aligned with the skill set of the involved stakeholders. Also, OBPM re-
sults must actually oﬀer competitive advantages, e.g., increased eﬃciency,
increased understanding accuracy, or less mental eﬀort needed for humans.
Our requirements catalogue is an extension of [63] who raise initial require-
ments regarding the implementation of modelling and analysis in OBPM (here:
R5 and R6). As discussed, all the identiﬁed requirements must be met, as oth-
erwise, it can be expected that OBPM can not be successfully implemented
(e.g., the OBPM cannot be created without an ontology, etc.). In the following,
we therefore assess the state-of-the-art on OBPM research, in order to verify
whether there exist suﬃcient means to meet these requirements.
3 OBPM “State-Of-The-Art” Analysis
In this section, we present our research method and literature analysis.
3.1 Method
To assess the current state-of-the-art on OBPM research w.r.t. the requirements
proposed in Section 2.2, we conducted a literature review following the standard
literature review method as proposed in [58]. First, we conducted brief searches
to gain an initial overview, following the suggestion in [49]. We then used concept-
mapping techniques to derive suitable keywords for a keyword-based literature
search as proposed by [58]. In result, we utilized the keyword combination of
“Ontolog*” AND “Process Model*”, and “Semantic” AND “Process Model*”.
In iterative pre-testing, we found that these keywords are suitable to retrieve a
substantial amount of relevant work. We queried 6 pertinent literature databases,
i.e., ACM digital library, AISel, IEEE, Emeralds Publishing, INFORMS Pubs,
Science Direct and Springer Link. This resulted in a total of 434 identiﬁed works.

6 C. Corea et al.
We then conducted a screening process in two review phases, as suggested by [10].
In review phase I, we eliminated duplicates and ﬁltered out irrelevant articles
based on their title and abstract. Then, in review phase II, all remaining articles
were read in full and assessed for relevance. Here, we deﬁned an article to be
relevant if its primary focus is OBPM or an intersection of BPM and OBPM.
Also, due to funding constraints, the article had to be publically available to
be included. Based on these review phases, we identiﬁed 47 works as relevant.
For the works selected to be relevant, we further performed a backward- and
forward-search (by references), as suggested in [61]. This resulted in 4 additional
identiﬁed works. To summarize, we could identify 51 (47 keyword-based + 4
f/b) relevant works by means of our literature review. In the following, we assess
these works in regard to our proposed requirements.
3.2 Literature Analysis
Table 1 shows which of the raised requirements R1-R7 is satisﬁed (x), resp.
partially satisﬁed (o), by the identiﬁed relevant works.
Work R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7
Lin et al. (2005)[36] o o
Thomas et al. (2005)[55] o o
Lautenbacher et al. (2006)[33] o o
Ma et al. (2006)[37] o o
Barjis et al. (2007)[1] x
Born et al. (2007)[5] x x
Ehrig et al. (2007)[15] o
H¨oﬀerer et al. (2007)[29] x
Sujanto et al. (2008)[52] x
Cabral et al. (2009)[6] o o
Di Franc. et al. (2009)[12] x
Fengel et al. (2009)[22] x x
Hinge et al. (2009)[27] o
Markovic et al. (2009)[39] x
Norton et al. (2009)[42] o
Thomas et al. (2009)[56] o/m x
Barnickel et al. (2010)[2] m x
Hua et al. (2010)[28] o o
Tan et al. (2010)[54] o o o
Benaben et al. (2011)[4] x
Fellmann et al. (2011)[20] o/m x
Fellmann et al. (2011)[21] x x
Kim et al. (2011)[32] o o
Gong et al. (2012)[25] x
Stolfa et al. (2012)[51] o
Fill et al. (2013)[23] o
Work R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7
Kherbouche et al. (2013)[31] o o
De Cesare et al. (2014)[8] x
Maalouf et al. (2014)[38] o o o
Rospocher et al. (2014)[48] o o
Wang et al. (2014)[59] o o
Di Martino et al. (2015)[13] x
Kalogeraki et al. (2015)[30] x
Leopold et al. (2015)[34] x o
Ngo et al. (2015)[41] o o o
Fan et al. (2016)[17] x o x o x
Pham et al. (2016)[45] x
Corea et al. (2017)[11] x
Eﬀendi et al. (2017)[14] x
Elstermann et al. (2017)[16] o o
Fauzan et al. (2017)[18] x x
Gailly et al. (2017)[24] x
Hassen et al. (2017)[26] m x
Pawelozek et al. (2017)[44] m x
Riehle et al. (2017)[46] x x
Soltysik et al. (2017)[50] m x
Sungoko et al. (2017)[53] x x
Bartolini et al. (2019)[3] o x
Wang et al. (2019)[60] o/m o
Yanuariﬁani et al. (2019)[64] o o
Cao et al. (2021)[7] x
Table 1: Support of the considered works w.r.t. the identiﬁed requirements for
implementing OBPM (x = satisﬁed; o = partially satisﬁed; m = manual).

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 7
From the identiﬁed literature, it can be observed that the level of research in
regard to 5 out of the 7 raised requirements is alarmingly low (R1, R2, R4, R5,
R7). Also, regarding R3, many of the works only partially satisfy this require-
ment due to diﬀerent limitations (cf. the below discussion). In result, we see the
following research gaps:
• Insuﬃcient ontology support. Virtually all identiﬁed approaches assume
“ready-to-go” ontologies for an extension of process models. This places a
heavy burden on companies for adopting these approaches, as initially cre-
ating the ontology is left at the company’s responsibility. Here, novel ap-
proaches are needed that integrate ontology creation in the OBPM-lifecycle,
e.g., ontology-mining from textual descriptions, model repositories or process
data (event logs).
• Limitations in annotation support. Creating semantic annotations can
be seen as one of the most important components of implementing OBPM.
For creating semantic annotations, we can identify three main approaches
from the identiﬁed literature, namely manual annotation, transformation,
and matching. 1) Manual annotation (denoted m in Table 1) is geared to-
wards creating annotations manually. While we agree that this could be
used for revision or ﬁne-tuning, a completely manual annotation of process
models must be considered as unfeasible, as this forces modelers to compare
thousands of elements and map their relations manually [46]. 2) Approaches
with annotation through transformation (denoted o in Table 1) implement an
automated annotation by transforming every process model element into an
ontology instance. While this creates a representation of the process model on
the ontology level, a major limitation of this approach is that the annotations
are on a pure syntactical level, i.e., process model elements are instantiated
as an instance of their type, however, the “real-life” semantics of the process
activities cannot be captured. 3) To facilitate such a form of “semantic” an-
notations, a third line of approaches proposes means to match process model
element and ontology concept semantics by matching semantically equiva-
lent model and ontology elements, mainly by means of linguistic analysis
(denoted x in Table 1). Regarding this line of approaches, while see some
results based on terminological matching, we see a strong lack of works inte-
grating and/or combining other matching techniques, e.g., constraint-based
matching, graph-based matching, instance (data) based matching, model
based matching or incorporating context information in matching (cf. e.g.
the classiﬁcation of matching techniques in [43]). Here, more approaches and
comparative studies are needed to facilitate better automated annotation.
Also, supervised machine-learning approaches are needed that can mimic
human annotations.
• Missing veriﬁcation support. As motivated in Section 2, a natural lan-
guage based matching between process model elements and ontology ele-
ments without considering their contexts can lead to the resulting ontology-
based process model being inconsistent or implausible. Yet, the majority of
annotation approaches via matching implement such an annotation based

8 C. Corea et al.
on linguistic mapping (cf. [5,22,29,18,12,34,46]). While this raises strong de-
mand for annotation veriﬁcation, we see from Table 1 that there is currently
no suﬃcient support for verifying consistency process model and the ontol-
ogy. Here, novel approaches are needed for analyzing and resolving inconsis-
tencies in ontology-based process models.
• Missing evolution support. Current works for annotations are mainly
geared towards an initialization of an ontology-based process model. How-
ever, as ontologies or the process models may need to be evolved over time,
the other corresponding artifact also needs to be altered in a synchronized
manner. Here, new methods are needed that can support companies in model
evolution. Otherwise, there is no suﬃcient support for sustainable OBPM.
• Missing studies with human participants. As a major warning-sign, we
found almost no studies investigating the use of OBPM with human partic-
ipants. Therefore, the eﬀects for workers of introducing OBPM are unclear,
e.g., do ontology-based process modelling really improve understanding and
eﬃciency, or are they too complicated to use? Such experimental research
should urgently be conducted. This also becomes apparent when assessing
the considered works of our literature analysis in the scope of the core ele-
ments of BPM-framework by [47]. This framework identiﬁes six core elements
of business process management, namely strategic alignment, governance,
methods, technologies, people and culture. As can be seen in Figure 3, the
identiﬁed works are mainly geared towards the dimensions of concrete meth-
ods and technologies. Here, we see a clear lack of research regarding OBPM
relative to the skill sets of the involved people, organizational culture and
structures.
Fig.3: Focus of the identiﬁed works (cf. Table 1) in the scope of the six-core-
elements of BPM framework [47] (Multiple counting possible).
4 Research Agenda
In regard to the results of our literature analysis, it seems that much research
is still needed to implement the requirements R1-R7 identiﬁed in this work.
Based on the identiﬁed research gaps, we therefore propose the following research
agenda to guide future research and leverage the implementation of OBPM,
shown in Table 2

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 9
Research Gap Research needed
Ontology Support • Integrating ontology creation in the OBPM-lifecycle
• Ontology mining (e.g. from data, textual descriptions)
• Recommendations during ontology-modelling
Annotation Support • Improving mapping approaches, e.g., with novel matching techniques
(cf. the classiﬁcation in [43]) and novel similarity measures
• Combining matching techniques to leverage matching
• In case of repositories of ontology-based process models: Identify simi-
larities of models in order to recommend annotations, e.g. via collabo-
rative ﬁltering, cf. [9]
• Creating AI systems that can learn/mimic human annotations
• Consideration of context information for annotation suggestions (e.g.
preceding and succeeding elements, granularity of surrounding model
contents, general topic of the model, industry-speciﬁc process knowl-
edge)
• For evaluating matching techniques: Evaluation based on probabilistic
gold standards [35] (i.e. averaged over multiple users), to avoid bias of
the creator of the gold standard
Annotation Veriﬁcation • Identifying incoherent or implausible mappings between process models
and ontologies
• Analyzing inconsistencies or pin-pointing highly problematic elements,
e.g. by means of element-based inconsistency measures
• Means for resolving inconsistencies, e.g. in the scope of systems for
semi-automated/guided inconsistency resolution
Evolution Support • Support of change propagation during modelling, e.g., automatedly syn-
chronizing process model and ontology if an element is deleted in one
of the two artifacts
• Using ontology-based reasoning and insights from process monitoring
to recommend changes needed in the process models or ontologies
• Leveraging insights from process monitoring to recommend changes
needed for the company ontology
• Means for long-term model management, e.g. versioning
Contextual Fit/People • Evaluation of approaches and tools for OBPM with human participants,
i.e., do all the studied results really oﬀer competitive advantages, for
example in the form of increased eﬃciency, understanding accuracy or
reduced cognitive load
• Guidelines for the design of OBPM tools and interfaces
• More research on how OBPM aﬀects people and company culture (cf.
Figure 3)
Other • Maturity models and procedure models for guiding companies in adopt-
ing OBPM
• Success stories/case studies to share knowledge and leverage OBPM
adoption
• OBPM lifecycle models, e.g., how to integrate insights from process
monitoring and ontology-based reasoning to improve process models
and ontologies
• Monitoring process execution for ontology-based process execution
Table 2: Proposed Research Agenda
From a technical perspective, the distilled research agenda identiﬁes numer-
ous technical challenges that need to be addressed in regard to implementing

10 C. Corea et al.
OBPM, e.g., in the areas of ontology-support, annotation support, annotation
veriﬁcation and evolution support. Furthermore, research investigating the con-
textual ﬁt of OBPM is much needed. Here, on the one hand, there is work needed
to assessing the added value of OBPM. On the other hand, the (cognitive) eﬀects
of introducing OBPM are still unclear, e.g., how can OBPM results be aligned
with the skill sets of the involved stakeholders and does OBPM really oﬀer pos-
itive cognitive eﬀects for humans, such as better understanding eﬃciency?
5 Conclusion
So, OBPM: will we live to see it? As a main takeaway, while the primary focus
in research has been on R6 (ontology-based reasoning, cf. Section 3), the pro-
posed requirements show that there are many more components still needed for
implementing OBPM, especially in regard to initializing and evolving models.
To this aim, our distilled research agenda provides a guideline for developing
these needed results, and – on a positive note – shows that the ﬁeld of OBPM
oﬀers many opportunities for future research. If we would have to propose one
“paradigm change”, we would opt for less works such as “yet another approach
for using ontology-based process models” and more awareness for the initial cre-
ation and long-term management of ontology-based process models themselves.
Also, the number of works that investigate the actual cognitive eﬀects and us-
ability of process models is alarmingly low, which urgently has to be addressed
to ensure that academic results and company use cases are aligned. Should these
requirements be met, OBPM can and will be successfully implemented.
We identify the following limitations. First, this review was limited to on-
tologies formalized with description logics. While this is an important fragment
of OBPM, further works could also investigate the role of foundational ontolo-
gies in regard to OBPM. Second, the requirements identiﬁed in this work were
derived from a design science perspective, i.e., they are requirements needed for
an initial implementation. While we could already use these initial requirements
to show limitations in the state of the art, these requirements were not further
evaluated. In future works, we will therefore evaluate these requirements with
domain experts. Last, this work investigates the state of the art of scientiﬁc
contributions. In future work, we will further investigate industrial applications
and solutions and consolidate them with the ﬁndings of this work.
Acknowledgements
We thank Hagen Kerber for his preliminary research for this report. We also
thank Silvano Colombo Tosatto and colleagues for letting us borrow their title
idea [57].
References
1. Barjis, J.: Executable ontological business process model. In: Proceedings of the
ECIS 2007. University of St. Gallen (2007)

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 11
2. Barnickel, N., B¨ottcher, J., Paschke, A.: Incorporating semantic bridges into in-
formation ﬂow of cross-organizational business process models. In: Proceedings of
the SEMANTICS 2010. ACM (2010)
3. Bartolini, C., Calabr´o, A., Marchetti, E.: Enhancing business process modelling
with data protection compliance: An ontology-based proposal. In: Proceedings of
the ICISSP 2019. SciTePress (2019)
4. Benaben, F., Pingaud, H., Rajsiri, V., Lorre, J.P.: Collaborative process deduction
through a knowl.-based system. In: Proceedings of the DEXA 2011. IEEE (2011)
5. Born, M., D¨orr, F., Weber, I.: User-friendly semantic annotation in business process
modeling. In: Proceedings of the WISE 2007. Springer (2007)
6. Cabral, L., Norton, B., Domingue, J.: The business process modelling ontology. In:
Proceedings of the SBPM 2009 (2009)
7. Cao, J., He, Y.L., Zhu, Q.: An ontology-based procedure knowledge framework for
the process industry. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 99(2) (2021)
8. de Cesare, S., Juric, D., Lycett, M.: Toward the automation of business process
ontology generation. In: Proceedings of the CBI 2014. IEEE (2014)
9. Chan, N.N., Gaaloul, W., Tata, S.: Assisting business process design by activity
neighborhood context matching. In: International Conference on Service-Oriented
Computing. pp. 541–549. Springer (2012)
10. Colquhoun, H.L., Levac, D., O’Brien, K.K., Straus, S., Tricco, A.C., Perrier, L.,
Kastner, M., Moher, D.: Scoping reviews: time for clarity in deﬁnition, methods,
and reporting. Journal of clinical epidemiology 67(12) (2014)
11. Corea, C., Delfmann, P.: Detecting compliance with business rules in ont.-based
process modeling. In: Proceedings of the WI 2017. University of St. Gallen (2017)
12. Di Francescomarino, C., Tonella, P.: Supporting ontology-based semantic anno-
tation of business processes with automated suggestions. In: Proceedings of the
BPMDS 2009. Springer (2009)
13. Di Martino, B., Esposito, A., Nacchia, S., Maisto, S.A.: Semantic annotation of
bpmn: current approaches and new methodologies. In: Proceedings of the iiWAS
2015. ACM (2015)
14. Eﬀendi, Y.A., Sarno, R.: Swrl rules for identifying short loops in business process
ontology model. In: Proceedings of the ICTS 2017. IEEE (2017)
15. Ehrig, M., Koschmider, A., Oberweis, A.: Measuring similarity between semantic
business process models. In: Proceedings of the APCCM 2007. Australian Com-
puter Society, Inc. (2007)
16. Elstermann, M.: Proposal for using semantic technologies as a means to store and
exchange subject-oriented process models. In: Proceedings of the S-BPM ONE
2017. ACM (2017)
17. Fan, S., Hua, Z., Storey, V.C., Zhao, J.L.: A process ontology based approach
to easing semantic ambiguity in business process modeling. Data & Knowledge
Engineering 102 (2016)
18. Fauzan, A.C., Sarno, R., Ariyani, N.F.: Structure-based ont. matching of business
process model for fraud detection. In: Proceedings of the ICTS 2017. IEEE (2017)
19. Fellmann, M., Delfmann, P., Koschmider, A., Laue, R., Leopold, H., Schoknecht,
A.: Semantic technology in business process modeling and analysis. part 1: Match-
ing, modeling support, correctness and compliance. EMISA Forum 2015 (2015)
20. Fellmann, M., Hogrebe, F., Thomas, O., N¨uttgens, M.: Checking the semantic cor-
rectness of process models-an ontology-driven approach using domain knowledge
and rules. Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems Architectures 6(3) (2011)

12 C. Corea et al.
21. Fellmann, M., Thomas, O., Busch, B.: A query-driven approach for checking the
semantic correctness of ontology-based process representations. In: International
Conference on Business Information Systems. pp. 62–73. Springer (2011)
22. Fengel, J., Rebstock, M.: Model-based domain ontology engineering. In: Proceed-
ings of the SBPM 2009. ACM (2009)
23. Fill, H.G., Schremser, D., Karagiannis, D.: A generic approach for the semantic an-
notation of conceptual models using a service-oriented architecture. International
Journal of Knowledge Management 9(1) (2013)
24. Gailly, F., Alkhaldi, N., Casteleyn, S., Verbeke, W.: Recommendation-based con-
ceptual modeling and ontology evolution framework (cmoe+). Business & Infor-
mation Systems Engineering 59(4) (2017)
25. Gong, P., Jiang, J.M., Zhang, S., Chen, Z.Q.: Executability analysis for semanti-
cally annotated process model. In: Proceedings of the APSCC 2012. IEEE (2012)
26. Hassen, M.B., Turki, M., Gargouri, F.: Using core ontologies for extending sensitive
business process modeling with the knowledge perspective. In: Proceedings of the
ECBS 2017. ACM (2017)
27. Hinge, K., Ghose, A., Koliadis, G.: A tool for semantic eﬀect annotation of business
process models. In: Proceedings of the EDOC 2009. IEEE (2009)
28. Hua, Z., Zhao, J.L., Storey, V.C.: Exploring a domain ontology based approach to
business process design. In: Proceedings of the ICIS 2010 (2010)
29. H¨oﬀerer, P.: Achieving business process model interoperability using metamodels
and ontologies. In: Proceedings of the ECIS 2007. University of St. Gallen (2007)
30. Kalogeraki, E.M., Panayiotopoulos, T., Apostolou, D.: Semantic queries in bpmn
2.0: a contemporary method for information retrieval. In: Proceedings of the IISA
2015. IEEE (2015)
31. Kherbouche, O.M., Ahmad, A., Bouneﬀa, M., Basson, H.: Ont.-based impact as-
sessment in dynamic bus. processes. In: Proceedings of the FIT 2013. IEEE (2013)
32. Kim, G., Suh, Y.: Semantic business process space for intelligent management of
sales order business processes. Information Systems Frontiers 13(4) (2011)
33. Lautenbacher, F., Bauer, B.: Semantic reference-and business process modeling
enables an automatic synthesis. In: Proceedings of the SBPM 2006. ACM (2006)
34. Leopold, H., Meilicke, C., Fellmann, M., Pittke, F., Stuckenschmidt, H., Mendling,
J.: Towards the automated annotation of process models. In: Proceeding of the
CAISE 2015. Springer (2015)
35. Leopold, H., Niepert, M., Weidlich, M., Mendling, J., Dijkman, R., Stuckenschmidt,
H.: Probabilistic optimization of semantic process model matching. In: Proceedings
of the BPM 2012. Springer (2012)
36. Lin, Y., Ding, H.: Ontology-based semantic annotation for semantic interoperabil-
ity of process models. In: Proceedings of the CIMCA 2006. IEEE (2005)
37. Ma, Z., Wang, G., Ren, B., Wang, J.: Research on owl-based process model trasfor-
mation for interoperability. In: Proceedings of the ITIC 2006. IET (2006)
38. Maalouf, E., Sokhn, M.: Semantic based auto-completion of business process mod-
elling in egovernment. Informatik (2014)
39. Markovic, I., Hasibether, F., Jain, S., Stojanovic, N.: Process-oriented semantic
business modeling. In: Proceedings of the WI 2009. Springer (2009)
40. Meilicke, C., Stuckenschmidt, H.: Incoherence as a basis for measuring the quality
of ontology mappings. In: Proceedings of the International Workshop on Ontology
Matching (OM) collocated with ISWC (2008)
41. Ngo, C.D., Tran, H.N., Champeau, J.: Using process ont. together with process
editor to facilitate tool integration. In: Proceedings of the MODELSWARD 2015.
IEEE (2015)

Ontology-Based Process Modelling - Will we live to see it? 13
42. Norton, B., Cabral, L., Nitzsche, J.: Ontology-based translation of business process
models. In: Proceedings of the ICIW 2009. IEEE (2009)
43. Otero-Cerdeira, L., Rodr´ıguez-Mart´ınez, F.J., G´omez-Rodr´ıguez, A.: Ontology
matching: A literature review. Expert Systems with Applications 42(2) (2015)
44. Pawe loszek, I.: Process-oriented approach to competency management using on-
tologies. In: Proceedings of the FedCSIS 2017. IEEE (2017)
45. Pham, T.A., Thanh, N.L.: An ontology-based approach for business process com-
pliance checking. In: Proceedings of the ICUIMC 2016. ACM (2016)
46. Riehle, D.M., Jannaber, S., Delfmann, P., Thomas, O., Becker, J.: Automatically
annotating business process models with ontology concepts at design-time. In:
Proceedings of the ER 2017. Springer (2017)
47. Rosemann, M., vom Brocke, J.: The six core elements of business process manage-
ment. In: Handbook on business process management 1. Springer (2015)
48. Rospocher, M., Ghidini, C., Seraﬁni, L.: An ontology for the business process
modelling notation. In: Proceedings of the FOIS 2014 (2014)
49. Rowley, J., Slack, F.: Conducting a literature review. Management research (2004)
50. So ltysik, A., ˙Zytniewski, M.: Organizational knowledge resources integration in
hrm processes. In: Proceedings of the ICICIS 2017. IEEE (2017)
51. ˇStolfa, J., ˇStolfa, S., Koˇzusznik, J., Moudr´a, T.: Business process formal modeling
in graphical ontology tool. In: Proceedings of the MEDES 2012 (2012)
52. Sujanto, F., Burstein, F., Ceglowski, A., Churilov, L.: Application of domain on-
tology for decision support in medical emergency coordination (2008)
53. Sungkono, K.R., Sarno, R., Ariyani, N.F.: Reﬁning bus. process model with invis-
ible prime tasks using swrl rules. In: Proceedings of the ICTS 2017. IEEE (2017)
54. Tan, W., Yang, F., Shen, W.: An approach on business process ontology for cscw
using psl. In: Proceedings of the CSCWD. IEEE (2010)
55. Thomas, M., Redmond, R., Yoon, V., Singh, R.: A semantic approach to monitor
business process. Communications of the ACM 48(12) (2005)
56. Thomas, O., Fellmann, M.: Semantic process modeling–design and implementation
of an ontology-based representation of business processes. Business & Information
Systems Engineering 1(6) (2009)
57. Tosatto, S.C., Governatori, G., van Beest, N.: Checking regulatory compliance:
Will we live to see it? In: Proceedings of the BPM 2019. Springer (2019)
58. Vom Brocke, J., Simons, A., Riemer, K., Niehaves, B., Plattfaut, R., Cleven, A.:
Standing on the shoulders of giants: Challenges and recommendations of literature
search in information systems research. Communications of the association for
information systems 37(1) (2015)
59. Wang, P., Li, H., Zhang, B.: Context-aware workﬂow modeling approach using owl.
In: Proceedings of the CCDC 2014. IEEE (2014)
60. Wang, R., Nellippallil, A.B., Wang, G., Yan, Y., Allen, J.K., Mistree, F.: Ontology-
based uncertainty management approach in designing of robust decision workﬂows.
Journal of Engineering Design 30(10-12) (2019)
61. Webster, J., Watson, R.: Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a
literature review. MIS quarterly (2002)
62. Weske, M.: Business Process Management Architectures. Springer (2007)
63. Wetzstein, B., Ma, Z., Filipowska, A., Kaczmarek, M., Bhiri, S., Losada, S., Cobo,
J.M.L., Cicurel, L.: Semantic business process management: A lifecycle based re-
quirements analysis. In: Proceedings of the SBPM 2017. Citeseer (2007)
64. Yanuariﬁani, A.P., Chua, F.F., Chan, G.Y.: Automating business process model
generation from ont.-based requirements. In: Proceedings of the ICSCA 2019 (2019)