Integrated Project
Priority 2.4.7
Semantic based knowledge systems
Personal Information Model (PIMO) Ontology Guide
NEPOMUK Recommendation v1.1
Version 1.1
02.02.2009
Dissemination level: PU
Nature Report
Lead contractor DFKI
Start date of project 01.01.2006
Duration 36 months

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Authors
Leo Sauermann, DFKI
Ludger Van Elst, DFKI
Knud Möller, DERI
Project Co-ordinator
Dr. Ansgar Bernardi
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI) GmbH
Trippstadter Strasse 122
D 67663 Kaiserslautern
Germany
Email: bernardi@dfki.uni-kl.de, phone: +49 631 205 3582, fax: +49 631 205 4910
Partners
DEUTSCHES FORSCHUNGSZENTRUM F. KUENSTLICHE INTELLIGENZ GMBH
IBM IRELAND PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION LIMITED
SAP AG
HEWLETT PACKARD GALWAY LTD
THALES S.A.
PRC GROUP - THE MANAGEMENT HOUSE S.A.
EDGE-IT S.A.R.L
COGNIUM SYSTEMS S.A.
NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND, GALWAY
ECOLE POLYTECHNIQUE FEDERALE DE LAUSANNE
FORSCHUNGSZENTRUM INFORMATIK AN DER UNIVERSITAET KARLSRUHE
UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER
INSTITUTE OF COMMUNICATION AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS
KUNGLIGA TEKNISKA HOEGSKOLAN
UNIVERSITA DELLA SVIZZERA ITALIANA
IRION MANAGEMENT CONSULTING GMBH
Copyright: NEPOMUK Consortium 2006
Copyright on template: Irion Management Consulting GmbH 2006
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 ii

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Versions
Version Date Reason
0.1 01.06.2007 a template of the document prepared by Antoni Mylka
0.9 12.08.2008 Finished for review.
1.0 02.09.2008 Reviewed and accepted.
1.1 02.02.2009 Incorporating new handling of Tagging
Explanations of abbreviations on front page
Nature
R: Report
P: Prototype
R/P: Report and Prototype
O: Other
Dissemination level
PU: Public
PP: Restricted to other FP6 participants
RE: Restricted to speciﬁed group
CO: Conﬁdential, only for NEPOMUK partners
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 iii

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Table of contents
1 Abstract ............................................................... 1
2 Status of this document.............................................. 1
3 Introduction ........................................................... 1
3.1 Downloading PIMO .......................................... 2
4 PIMO integrates with key ontologies................................ 3
5 Examples ............................................................. 4
5.1 PIMO ontology and namespaces ........................... 4
6 Creating Personal Information Models.............................. 5
6.1 The User and their Individual PIMO ........................ 5
6.2 Things......................................................... 6
6.3 Connecting Things to the User’s PIMO..................... 6
6.4 Identiﬁcation of Things....................................... 7
6.5 A Complete Example ........................................ 10
6.6 Labels and Names of Things................................ 11
6.7 Textual description of Things ................................ 12
6.8 Rating and Ranking Things.................................. 13
6.9 Modelling Time ............................................... 13
6.10 Representing Modiﬁcation and Change Dates............. 13
6.11 Setting the Class of a Thing ................................. 14
6.12 The PIMO-upper ontology ................................... 15
6.13 Classes in PIMO-Upper...................................... 15
6.14 Describing Things with Attributes and Relations........... 17
6.15 Generic Properties in PIMO-Upper ......................... 17
6.16 Reﬁned properties in PIMO-Upper.......................... 18
6.17 Tagging Things with Tags.................................... 18
6.18 Topic Hierarchies............................................. 19
6.19 Creating Personalized Classes and Properties ............ 20
6.20 Collections of Things......................................... 21
6.21 Modeling Associations and Roles in PIMO................. 21
7 Connecting PIMO to Information Elements......................... 22
7.1 Connecting Things and Classes to Folders ................ 22
7.2 Integrating Facts about Things .............................. 23
8 PIMO-group level: Group and Domain ontologies ................. 23
9 Extending PIMO ...................................................... 24
9.1 Reﬁning Elements of PIMO-upper .......................... 24
9.2 Markup for the new ontology ................................ 26
9.3 Information Elements ........................................ 26
9.4 Extension by Sub-classing from External Classes......... 28
9.5 Summary ..................................................... 29
10 Importing Domain Ontologies into a User’s PIMO ................. 29
11 Practical Directions on Using PIMO................................. 30
11.1 Creating Things .............................................. 30
11.2 Changing the Type of a Thing ............................... 31
11.3 Deleting a Thing.............................................. 32
11.4 Deleting User-generated Classes and Properties ......... 32
11.5 Merging Duplicates........................................... 32
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 iv

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
11.6 Uniﬁcation of multiple Information Elements into one Thing 33
11.7 Tagging and Annotating Files ............................... 34
11.8 Geo-locating Things.......................................... 35
11.9 Deﬁning what is in the PIMO and what is not: NRL
Graphs and definedBy ...................................... 36
11.10 Using NAO and NIE Elements for Annotation.............. 37
11.11 How to Infer Knowledge Using Rules? ..................... 37
12 Rules Deﬁned by PIMO .............................................. 39
12.1 Construction Rules........................................... 39
12.2 Validation Rules .............................................. 40
12.3 Rules Valid when Integrating with NIE...................... 40
13 Sources considered for designing PIMO ........................... 41
A Changes .............................................................. 42
A.1 From v1.0 to 1.1.............................................. 42
B PIMO Speciﬁcation................................................... 45
B.1 Ontology Classes Description............................... 45
B.2 Ontology Properties Description ............................ 58
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 v

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
1 Abstract
The PIMO Ontology can be used to express Personal Information Models of
individuals. It is based on RDF and NRL, the NEPOMUK Representational
Language and other Semantic Web ontologies. This document describes the
principle elements of the language and how to use them.
2 Status of this document
This section describes the status of this document at the time of its publication.
The form used for this status message and document is inspired by the W3C
process.
This document is an NEPOMUK recommendation produced by Leo Sauermann
and Knud Möller as part of the task-force Ontologies in the NEPOMUK Project.
The document has been promoted from a draft form to this ofﬁcial form upon
reviewing by the general NEPOMUK consortium. Subsequent versions of PIMO
might mean that the speciﬁcation documents of the later versions render this
document obsolete, with respect to the version of PIMO in use, but not with
respect to this version.
This document and the PIMO ontology as such is a continuation and improve-
ment of existing work. Other documents may supersede this document. Parts
of this document will be published in other documents, such as scientiﬁc publi-
cations. This document is based on various other publications by the authors,
and is a continuation of existing work. Some formulations from the RDFS
primer and SKOS primer documents were reused.
Additional to this document, a FAQ is maintained in the public NEPOMUK wiki1.
This document is accompanied by a RDFS/NRL ontology2, which should
be downloaded (see Section 3.1) and read in parallel to learn more about
PIMO.
The key phrase “At Risk of Change” is used to mark parts of the recommen-
dation that are under discussion and change in future versions (can appear in
footnotes).
The editors of this document value feedback from from the public and from
the NEPOMUK consortium. Typographic errors and change requests of the
ontology can be reported using the NEPOMUK tracker3, using the category
ontology-pimo. General questions about using the ontology will be answered
in the FAQ. Subsequent versions of the ontology will include improvements
gathered in this way.
We want to thank our reviewers for their feedback: Ansgar Bernardi, Siegfried
Handschuh, Pär Lannerö, Enrico Minack, Gerald Reif, and Max Völkel.
3 Introduction
PIMO is the abbreviation for the Personal Information Model of a user. The
PIMO-Ontology is both an RDF vocabulary4 to express such a model and an
upper ontology deﬁning basic classes and properties to use.
Readers of this document should be familiar with the Resource Description
Framework on the level described in the RDFS-Primer [3] and the NRL speci-
1http://dev.nepomuk.semanticdesktop.org/wiki/PimoFaq
2http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo#
3https://dev.nepomuk.semanticdesktop.org/newticket
4More precisely, PIMO is based on the NEPOMUK Representational Language (NRL), which
extends the RDF model with a semantic model and support for named graphs and other features.
However, for the sake of simplicity, we will use the term RDF throughout most of this document.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 1

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
ﬁcation5. The emphasized key words “must”, “must not”, “required”, “shall”,
“shall not”, “should”, “should not”, “recommended”, “may”, and “optional”
in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.
The scope of a PIMO is to model data that is within the attention of the user and
needed for knowledge work or private use. The focus is on data that is accessed
through a Semantic Desktop or other personalized Semantic Web applications.
We call this the Personal Knowledge Workspace [10] or Personal Space of
Information (PSI) [11], embracing all data “needed by an individual to perform
knowledge work”. It is (1) independent from the way the user accesses the
data, (2) independent from the source, format, and author of the data. The
abbreviation PSI will be used.
Today, such data is typically stored in ﬁles, in Personal Information Management
(PIM) or in groupware systems. A user has to cope with different formats of
data, such as text documents, contact information, e-mails, appointments, task
lists, project plans, or an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. Existing
information that is already stored in information systems is in the scope of PIMO,
but abstract concepts (such as “Love”, “Language”) can also be represented, if
needed.
PIMO is based on the idea that users have a mental model to categorize their
environment. It represents the user itself and the fact that he has a Personal
Information Model, this is described in Section 6.1. Building a PIMO for the
imaginary user Claudia Stern is the guiding example for this document. Each
concept in the environment of the user is represented as Thing in the model,
and mapped to documents and other entities that mention the concept (see
Section 6.2). Things can be described via their relations to other Things or
by literal RDF properties, the key properties are deﬁned in Section 6.14 and
directions given how to use them. An important question is the class of a Thing;
the semantics of classes and top level classes are presented in Sections 6.11-
6.13. To match and align similar concepts, existing identiﬁcation systems are
reused and integrated (Section 6.4).
PIMO is similar to SKOS or Topic Maps (TM) [1] in its goal of providing an
easy way of modelling, but different in the way concepts are modeled. RDFS
classes and sub-class relations (which are used in NRL) are used to represent
the classes of Things, individuals are represented using typed RDF resources.
From TM, the idea of indirect identiﬁcation is taken up.
PIMO is different from OWL, where sameAs relations are symmetric equivalence
relations forming a fully connected graph amongst identical resources. In PIMO,
Things are connected to their equivalent resources using directed relations.
The design rationale is to keep the PIMO ontology as minimal as possible,
and also the data needed to create a PIMO for a user as minimal as possible.
Inside one PIMO of a user, duplication is avoided. PIMO builds on Semantic
Desktop ontologies (NRL, NIE, NAO) and guidelines are provided how to reuse
other existing RDFS ontologies (Section 9) and import data expressed in these
ontologies. After importing, rules are used to integrate facts (see Section 7.2).
Only by addressing all key issues — precise representation, easy adoption,
easy to understand by users, extensibility, interoperability, reuse of existing
ontologies, data integration — PIMO provides a framework for creating personal
information management applications and ontologies.
3.1 Downloading PIMO
The RDF descriptions of the ontology can be retrieved from its namespace
using content negotiation:
Namespace:
5http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nrl/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 2

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo#
Different serializations are available:
• XML/RDFS Serialization: PIMO (Data Graph Only)
http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo/pimo_data.
rdfs
• XML/RDFS Serialization: PIMO (Metadata Graph Only)
http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo/pimo_metadata.
rdfs
• TriG Serialization: PIMO (Graph Set)
http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo/pimo.trig
4 PIMO integrates with key ontologies
The PIMO framework does not stand alone but is part of a set of carefully
designed and integrated ontologies for the Semantic Desktop which were
developed in parallel to provide an integrated framework. In Figure 1 an
overview is given.
Figure 1: Integrated Ontologies
The NEPOMUK Representational Language NRL ontology6 builds the repre-
sentational layer and the semantic metadata axioms used to express PIMO.
NRL is a meta-language comparable to OWL or RDF/S. The key characteristics
of NRL are (on top of RDF/S) support for named graphs in semantic state-
ments, a notation for contextualized inference and semantics, and a selection
of semantic relations (inverse, transitive, reﬂexive).
The NEPOMUK Information Element NIE ontology7 describes desktop el-
ements such as address book entries, documents, e-mails, appointments,
6http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nrl/
7http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nie/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 3

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
pictures, and multimedia ﬁles. The ontology discriminates between the rep-
resentation (binary ﬁles) and the information stored therein. PIMO reuses
the classes of NIE and suggests how to integrate and annotate vast personal
spaces of information (PSI) expressed in NIE.
Annotations and tagging are represented in the NEPOMUK Annotation NAO
ontology. It represents change-dates, author, and other key metadata of
documents. NIE and PIMO both extend NAO. A part of NAO is the NEPOMUK
Graph Metadata NGM ontology to annotate named graphs.
The PIMO ontology crosses two of the layers in the ontology pyramid, data
related to PIMO can be divided into three smaller layers (also visible in Figure1):
• Foundational PIMO: The PIMO ontology as such, as deﬁned in this
speciﬁcation and accompanying NRL serialization. This includes the
classes and properties of PIMO-upper (see Section 6.12), which work on
the Upper-Level Layer of NEPOMUK and everything else deﬁned in the
PIMO vocabulary. PIMO-upper is the same for every Semantic Desktop
user and is valid in a global context.
• Group-level PIMO: Domain ontologies that are shared within a group.
They can be imported by users. A description is given in Section 8.
• Personal-level PIMO: The classes, properties, and Things created by an
individual user. Also called user-PIMO, this layer includes the data that is
only relevant in the context of one individual.
5 Examples
A scenario is used to explain the ontology elements. A ﬁctional persona,
Claudia Stern, is our example user. She is working for EX-Ample Inc., a
ﬁctional company producing “Extreme Guitar Ampliﬁers”, and her current task
is to organize a business trip to a meeting with guitarists and bass players in
Belfast.
For convenience and readability, this speciﬁcation uses an abbreviated form
to represent URI-References. A name of the form prefix:suffix should be
interpreted as a URI-Reference consisting of the URI-Reference associated
with the preﬁx concatenated with the sufﬁx.
RDF graphs are written in N3/Turtle syntax. Examples serialized as RDF
appear in this typesetting:
claudia:Claudia a pimo:Person;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:claudia@example.com> .
5.1 PIMO ontology and namespaces
The ontology described in this document has this namespace:
Namespace:
http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo#
During the lifetime of the NEPOMUK project (until Dec 2008), the PIMO on-
tology and the according documentation may change, but the namespace will
not change. The namespace stays ﬁxed to keep the necessary changes of
software implementations at a minimal level. We have adopted this practice
from other projects, which have applied it successfully. Examples are the W3C’s
XSD datatypes (the recommendation changed in 2007, the namespace did not)
or the FOAF project.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 4

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Throughout this document these ontologies and namespaces are used, also
indicating their respective versions PIMO is building on:
@prefix rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>.
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>.
@prefix nrl: <http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/08/15/nrl#>.
@prefix nao: <http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/08/15/nao#>.
@prefix pimo: <http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/pimo#>.
@prefix ncal: <http://ont.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/04/02/ncal#>.
@prefix nco: <http://ont.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/03/22/nco#>.
@prefix nfo: <http://ont.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/03/22/nfo#>.
@prefix nie: <http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/01/19/nie#>.
@prefix nmo: <http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/03/22/nmo#>.
@prefix claudia: <http://www.example.com/people/claudia#> .
6 Creating Personal Information Models
In this section, all key elements of the ontology are presented. The order used
reﬂects the steps a knowledge engineer will have to take to implement this
recommendation.
6.1 The User and their Individual PIMO
As a prerequisite to create a PIMO and Things inside the PIMO, each user
needs a personal namespace. The namespace is used as a preﬁx for all URIs
minted for the user. Often these are namespaces using the HTTP URI scheme,
but any RDF namespace can be used. The example namespace used in this
document is http://www.example.com/people/claudia# and is abbreviated
with “claudia:”.
Users are represented as instances of the class pimo:Person. For each
instance, a new URI is generated and a few key facts are represented to identify
the user. After the user has been instantiated, details such as email addresses
are added by using terms from the NEPOMUK contact ontology, NCO. In NCO,
contact information connected to people is modeled as a complex resource,
not as a simple literal:
claudia:Claudia a pimo:Person;
rdfs:label "Claudia Stern";
nco:hasEmailAddress mailto:claudia@example.com.
mailto:claudia@example.com a nco:EmailAddress;
nco:contactMediumComment "work";
nco:emailAddress "claudia@example.com".
The second entity that needs to be represented is the Personal Information
Model of the User. It is connected to the user via the pimo:creator relation,
and the user’s namespace is added. For Claudia this is:
claudia:PIMO a pimo:PersonalInformationModel;
pimo:creator claudia:Claudia;
nao:hasDefaultNamespace "http://www.example.com/people/claudia#";
nao:hasDefaultNamespaceAbbreviation "claudia".
pimo:PersonalInformationModel is a sub-class of nrl:Ontology, allowing
more metadata to be added using NRL compliant standards. More about
NRL metadata is described in Section 11.9. We further call a this instance
of pimo:PersonalInformationModel of an individual a user-PIMO. Claudia’s
user-PIMO is claudia:PIMO. As an abbreviation, it is also correct to write
“Claudia’s PIMO” instead of “Claudia’s user-PIMO”.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 5

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
6.2 Things
The PIMO ontology deﬁnes the basic class Thing for mental concepts. Every
information element encountered inknowledge work by a useris represented as
a Thing. A Thing is a unique representation of an entity of the real world within
one user-PIMO. On the PSI of a user, a real world entity can be represented in
multiple data sources. For example, the person “Dirk Hagemann” may be author
of an e-mail, described in an address book entry, and stored in a accounting
tool, all part of the workspace of “Claudia”. One instance of pimo:Person is
created as unique Thing linking to these multiple representations, such as
shown in Figure 2.
Dirk
Address Book
name: "Dirk"
tel: "555-76123"
...
Email
from:   Dirk
to:       Claudia
...
Thing
Resources in
the workspace
Figure 2: Thing and Resources
An application handling a resource in the workspace can be aware that there
may be a Thing representing the resource. For example, Claudia’s e-mail client
may examine the sender of an e-mail (Dirk) and search for the pimo:Thing
that represents Dirk uniquely. Once the right Thing is found by the application,
more information about Dirk can be discovered.
This principle includes all elements (nie:InformationElement and other RDF
resources) in the user’s Personal Space of Information (PSI). For each infor-
mation element, a Thing in the user’s PIMO must be created. The information
element exists independent of the user, the same element can be stored in mul-
tiple folders or data sources on one desktop, and also on other desktops and
on the web. A Thing is the personalized view of one user on this information
element, independent of representation or storage location.
To be adequate, a PIMO of a user should contain all nameable entities known
to the user, but to be efﬁcient, this representation should be restricted to the
minimal data needed.
6.3 Connecting Things to the User’s PIMO
In a scenario of multiple connected semantic desktops, it will frequently occur
that users import data from each other’s desktop onto their own desktop. It is
therefore important to know which resources (primarily Things, but also Classes
and Properties) were created by which user and originate from which PIMO.
For this, the property pimo:isDefinedBy is used.
Continuing the example above, this property connects the Person to the PIMO
in which it is deﬁned. This is mandatory for every deﬁned Thing and allows
applications to identify which elements are part of a user-PIMO and which are
not8.
8We intentionally did not only rely on NRL graphs to model the relation between the model and
instances deﬁned by it. A graph can only contain statements, about, but not resources as such. To
model that a resource is part of a PIMO, the pimo:isDefinedBy relation is a clear representation.
Additionally, named graphs can be used to declare what statements are declared in a PIMO,
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 6

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
claudia:Claudia pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO.
An isDefinedBy property is also deﬁned in RDFS, where resources can be
connected to their deﬁning ontologies, and is also discussed in the light of the
OWL standard9. The semantics of isDefinedBy in PIMO is based on these,
with the extension that we deﬁne it as a required property.
6.4 Identiﬁcation of Things
A Thing must have an URI and should be described with properties that
identifyit. Identiﬁersallowtoanalyseinformationelementsandﬁndoccurrences
of the Thing. For example, the person “Dirk Hagemann” is represented once as
an instance of the class pimo:Person and identiﬁed using his e-mail address.
The RDF descriptions of emails and documents can then be analysed to ﬁnd
resources that represent the same entity via this identiﬁer.
# The canonical Dirk
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>.
# An e-mail in which Dirk #2 occurs
<imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1> a nmo:Mail;
nmo:from <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>.
# Dirk #2, the email sender
<imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from> a nco:Contact;
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>.
<mailto:dirk@example.com> a nmo:EmailAddress;
nco:emailAddress "dirk@example.com".
# Dirk #3, as address book contact
<file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk> a nco:PersonContact;
nco:nameFamily "Hagemann";
nco:nameGiven "Dirk";
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>;
nco:photo <http://www.example.com/people/dirk/photo.jpg>.
In this example, we see that the Person Dirk appears three times in this
knowledge workspace. First, in the form of an instance of pimo:Person, as
the canonical Dirk. Second, as sender of an e-mail and third as entry in an
address book. Only one instance is the pimo:Thing representation of Dirk:
claudia:DirkHagemann. The others are information elements representing the
same entity.
To work effectively, PIMO is based on the Unique Name Assumption (UNA).
The UNA is a rule that declares two RDF resources with different URIs as
different individuals. This is common in desktop applications (for example ﬁles
with different names are different) and intuitive to grasp for users. But it is
different from the OWL ontology language where duplicate entries are common
and the UNA is not enforced. PIMO is designed for personal systems, where
an application has access to the complete model and can avoid duplicates
before creating them.
To enforce the UNA, duplicate Things must be avoided. The crucial moment
to do this is before creating a new Thing. Things can either be created by the
user manually or automatically by analysing existing native resources. In any
case, before creating a new Thing, all existing Things have to be examined if a
see 11.9
9http://www.w3.org/2007/OWL/wiki/Syntax#Declarations_and_Structural_
Consistency
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 7

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Group Ontologies, the Semantic Web
Public Web Resources
claudia:
DirkHagemann
"dirk@sap.com"
http://www.sap.com/
people/DirkHagemann
http://id.sap.com/id/
1650
Resources and ﬁles on Claudia's local desktop
imap://
claudia@sap.com/
INBOX#1#FROM
ﬁle://home/claudia/
dirk-vc/#dirk
nao:identiﬁer
other
Representation
referencing
occurrence
grounding
Figure 3: Different Identiﬁcation Mechanisms
Thing with a same name or same identifying properties already exists. If an
existing Thing is found, it must be reused. Immediately after creating a new
Thing, identifying properties should be set to distinguish the Thing and avoid
duplication. Section 11.1 further describes the complete process of creating
things.
In the next paragraphs, essential identifying properties are described, an
overview is given in Figure 3.
The primary identiﬁer of a Thing is it’s URI. New URIs for Things must be
generated using the namespace of the user as preﬁx and then a unique local
name. Although the local name can be entirely a random string, we recommend
to include the label in the URI for readability. When minting a new URI that
clashes with an existing URI, a random element can be added to the new URI.
A URI for Claudia Stern is:
claudia:Claudia
NAO-Identiﬁers Existing identiﬁcation schemes based on NAO should be
reused for this purpose by representing them with nao:identifier and its sub-
properties. If an identiﬁer is found as meta-data of a native resource (usually
an nie:InformationElement), the identiﬁer must be copied to the Thing. This
allows others to match and identify the correct Thing when encountering the
next information element. Example identiﬁers are nmo:messageId for e-mails,
ncal:uid for appointments, or nexif:imageUniqueID for images. Instead of
using the plain nao:identifier property, these speciﬁc properties should be
used or new sub-properties of nao:identifier created 10. In this document,
we assume that e-mail addresses can be used to identify persons.
# Copy all identifiers you can find about the Thing.
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
nao:identifier "dirk@example.com".
Identiﬁers consisting of multiple RDF statements cannot be captured us-
ing nao:identifier. They are comparable to a primary key in a relational
database consisting of multiple columns. These multi-key identiﬁers must
be merged into one nao:identifier.
Grounding Occurrence The relation pimo:groundingOccurrence is used
to link a Thing to an nie:InformationElement that has this Thing as primary
topic. For example, the grounding for a person could be the entry in the address
book describing the person. On the other hand, an e-mail with this person
as the sender or recipient would normally not be a grounding occurrence. A
Thing represents the mental concept, the pimo:groundingOccurrence links to
10I.e. if you want to represent ISBN numbers and there is no property for them, create a new
sub-property isbn of nao:identifier.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 8

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
existing Information Elements that are handled by existing applications. This is
a key for reusing the features of these applications. The grounding occurrence
can change, for instance if a ﬁle was moved and the URI of the Information
Element changed, the grounding occurrence relation needs to be changed. A
similar case happens when a ﬁle is uploaded to a shared workspace and not
kept locally any more — all annotations of the Thing stay the same (the URI of
the Thing does not change), the Information Element changes. Multiple values
are allowed, this reﬂects the fact that the same Thing can be represented in
multiple applications, and dependent on the work context, the user may want
to open a different application.
# Link to Dirk #3 from example above.
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk>.
Occurrence The relation pimo:occurrence connects a pimo:Thing with a
resource representing the same real world entity. Facts about the occurrence
are then also valid for the connected Thing. For example, if the person Dirk
appears as sender of an e-mail, then the resource identifying the sender is
an occurrence of Dirk. Based on the occurrence relation, Dirk (the unique
pimo:Person) is the sender of the given e-mail. Occurrence relations are to
be used on resources representing the same entity in a different context, but
not on resources mentioning the entity. For example, it is not valid to say that
an e-mail is an occurrence of a person, only the sender or recipient can be
occurrences of a person.
Occurrences of a Thing can be found by searching for entities with the same
identifying properties.
# Link to Dirk #2 from example above,
# he occurs as sender of an e-mail
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:occurrence <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>.
Besidesidentiﬁcation, boththepimo:groundingOccurrenceandthepimo:occurrence
relation have implications on data integration and affect semantic meaning of a
Thing. This will be described later in Section 7.
Referencing Occurrence A Referencing Occurrence is an indirect approach
to identiﬁcation. Annotating a Thing with an information element as referencing
occurrence states that the information element contains a description of the
Thing. Its primary topic must be the Thing. The Thing is indirectly identiﬁed by
the element, when two Things in different models share the same information
element as referencing occurrence, they may be equal and could be matched.
The following description is an adaption of XTM’s subject indicators [19, 16].
The referencing occurrence is a kind of proxy for the Thing. Examples of
referencing occurrences are:
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:referencingOccurrence <http://www.example.com/people/DirkHagemann>.
claudia:ExampleInc a pimo:Organization;
pimo:referencingOccurrence <http://www.example.com/>;
pimo:referencingOccurrence <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Example.com>.
It should contain a human readable documentation describing the concept.
The resource could be a document, ontology, video, audio, anything able to
describe to a human what the concept is about. The resource is a reference
to the concept of the Thing. A good example for a referencing occurrence is a
wikipedia article.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 9

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
A referencing occurrence describes the concept with the purpose of being
widely used by ontologies. Consequently, it is important that the document de-
scribes exactly what concept it is about and what not. Even if the author works
as accurately as possible, different people will never interpret a referencing
occurrence 100% the same way. However, the concept of referencing occur-
rences is worth using it, because it allows a shallow match of heterogenous
information models, and because there is ﬁnally no alternative to it.
It is recommended to use wikipedia URIs as objects of referencing oc-
currences. In contrast, URIs minted by DBPedia11 must be related using the
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation relation.
Other Representation The pimo:hasOtherRepresentation relation is used
to connect pimo:Things with other representations of the same Thing in other
Semantic Web ontologies. This can be the case with shared ontologies, such
as company white page systems or Semantic Social Networking websites.
The knowledge modeled should be compatible with the ontologies used by the
user. An example for such other representation is12:
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation <http://id.example.com/person/1650>.
Another example would be the city of Belfast where Claudia wants to travel to,
linked to the DBPedia entry about it:
claudia:Belfast a pimo:City, pimo:Tag;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
pimo:tagLabel "Belfast";
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Belfast>;
geo:lat "54.5833333";
geo:long "-5.9333333".
The relation can be used both to identify Things by their other representations,
and to fetch more data. In this example, the latitude and longitude are actually
superﬂuous data, as they can be retrieved from the other representation in
DBPedia. Assuming Dirk also represents Belfast in his PIMO, but independent
from Claudia, but linking to the same DBPedia entry, algorithmically matching
their different representations is straightforward.
Other Conceptualization To map user-generated classes to classes deﬁned
in other ontologies, the pimo:hasOtherConceptualization relation connects
classes deﬁned in a user’s PIMO with classes deﬁned in domain ontologies.
Classes deﬁned in domain ontologies should be sub-classes of PIMO-upper
classes, see Section 9.
Implementations can use the pimo:hasOtherConceptualization to allow the
user and algorithms to map user–speciﬁc classes to classes deﬁned in other
ontologies, without implying that there is a sub-class relationship.
6.5 A Complete Example
A complete example for all different identiﬁcation properties can now be built
from the above annotations.
11DBPedia is a Semantic Web representation of wikipedia and provides URIs for concepts,
whereas wikipedia provides URIs for documents describing concepts. An example DBPedia URI is:
http://dbpedia.org/page/Berlin
12Using the URI scheme of the ECS University in our example domain. http://id.ecs.soton.
ac.uk/docs/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 10

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
For Claudia, her co-worker Dirk Hagemann is identiﬁed and linked to occur-
rences like this:
# The canonical pimo:Person Dirk,
# a pimo:Thing from Claudia's PIMO
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
nao:prefLabel 'Dirk Hagemann';
nao:identifier "dirk@example.com";
pimo:occurrence <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk>;
pimo:referencingOccurrence <http://www.example.com/people/DirkHagemann>;
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation <http://id.example.com/person/1650>.
# An e-mail in which Dirk #2 occurs
<imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1> a nmo:Mail;
nmo:from <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>.
# Dirk #2, as email sender
<imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from> a nco:Contact;
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>.
<mailto:dirk@example.com> a nmo:EmailAddress;
nco:emailAddress "dirk@example.com".
# Dirk #3, as address book contact
<file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk> a nco:PersonContact;
nco:nameFamily "Hagemann";
nco:nameGiven "Dirk";
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>;
nco:photo <http://www.example.com/people/dirk/photo.jpg>.
This allows implementations to:
• identify the Thing when found occurring in documents,
• open a grounding occurrence to see the Thing within an existing desktop
application (i.e. the address book entry for a person),
• match this Thing with other representations via the same referencing
occurrence,
• use the other representation from the company’s white pages to show
additional data about the Thing.
The pimo:occurrence link is the generic basis, pimo:groundingOccurrence
and pimo:hasOtherRepresentation are sub-properties of it. This data should
be generated automatically and unsupervised. Adding identifying properties to
a Thing helps to ﬁnd more occurrences and therefore more information about
it.
6.6 Labels and Names of Things
To label Things, we recommend the NEPOMUK Annotation Ontology (NAO)
vocabulary and extended it. NAO deﬁnes properties for the preferred label,
multiple alternative labels. PIMO deﬁnes tag labels as unique names for unique
Tags.
nao:prefLabel A preferred label for a Thing. This property must be applied
to every instance of pimo:Thing (or its sub-propery pimo:tagLabel). It can be
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 11

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
used by applications to represent the Thing with a textual label and should be
human-readable. There must only be one prefLabel per Thing (mincardinality
and maxcardinality should be one)13.
pimo:tagLabel Deﬁnes a unique personal label for a Thing, which then is
also a Tag. The label must be unique within the scope of a user. If both are set,
pimo:tagLabel and nao:prefLabel of a resource must have the same value.
It is a sub-property of nao:prefLabel and of nao:personalIdentifier.
Tag labels are the recommended way to label and identify Things that are
used for classiﬁcation. As they are unique and human-readable, they may
be used for multiple application scenarios such as wikis, tagging, or matching
terms found in free-text. Naming a Thing with a pimo:tagLabel gives the
Thing a second type, pimo:Tag, which indicates that the Thing should now be
considered part of the user’s tagging system, see Section 6.17.
nao:altLabel An alternative label alongside the preferred label for a Thing.
These are alternative spellings, translations, nick-names. Implementations can
use these labels to ﬁnd Things when the user enters a text in a search box or
when analysing free text. If a Thing has occurrences, the labels of occurrences
should be copied as alternative labels to the thing.
In combination, these labelling techniques allow applications to clearly label
Things in user interfaces but also to lookup for Things based on alternative
names. For our example, these are:
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
# preferred label when shown
nao:prefLabel "Dirk Hagemann";
# a nickname for Dirk
nao:altLabel "hacki";
# a common misspelling
nao:altLabel "Dirck Hagemann";
# the personal identifier and tag label,
# Attention: this requires the class pimo:Tag
pimo:tagLabel "Dirk Hagemann".
Additionally, visual cues (icons, images, thumbnails) can be attached by using
NAO symbol relations:
• nao:hasSymbol
• nao:prefSymbol
• nao:altSymbol
6.7 Textual description of Things
To describe Things with a free-text, the simple nao:description property
should be used. This allows users to add a (possibly searchable) description
of the Thing in a simple way. The description string value should contain no
format markup but be a plain text.
For more complex free-text descriptions of Things, the property pimo:wikiText
is reserved. Formatting (font-weight, italics) and linking to other pages is
supported in this property, implementers may use the Wiki Interchange Format
14 as syntax, or RDFa[2].
13These restrictions are not explicitly noted in the RDF description of the property, as NRL does
not support property restrictions for classes.
14http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Wiki_Interchange_Format
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 12

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
6.8 Rating and Ranking Things
Ratings of Things can be expressed using nao:numericRating. For numeri-
cRating, the range of values must be within [0..10] (inclusive) 15. A value of ’0’
is interpreted as not set, a rating of 1 a bad rating and a rating of 10 a good
rating. Furthermore, resources can only be given at most one numeric rating,
thus the maximum cardinality is 1. Applications may partition the values into
discrete ratings (such as 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 to represent the semantics of “5 star
ratings”).
The rating values may and should be used for ranking of Things and ﬁltering. A
populated PIMO contains thousands of Things, user interfaces should use the
nao:numericRating values to ﬁlter out low-ranked resources and highlight high-
ranked resources. Implementations can set the nao:numericRating values
automatically to computed values.
6.9 Modelling Time
In PIMO, no special treatment of time is modeled. We are aware that repre-
senting points in time, durations, and other periods of time is an important
aspect of ontologies. We recommend to use the XML Schema Datatypes
to represent time. There, ISO 8601 is recommended. Timezones must be
handled according to this standard, encoded inside the literal value16.
Periods of time can be represented using sub-classes of the abstract class
pimo:ProcessConcept which represents lasting processes such as events or
projects. For durations that last a number of days or months, we recommend to
use the standardized XML datatypes17:
• xs:dayTimeDuration for durations measured in days, hours, and min-
utes.
• xs:yearMonthDuration for durations measured in months and years
ImplementersarefreetouseeithertheXSDtypesorsub-classesofpimo:ProcessConcept.
There have been issues with other notations of duration and therefore the W3C
Semantic Web Best Practices and Deployment Group published a note18 to
restrict durations to these values.
6.10 Representing Modiﬁcation and Change Dates
The change and creation dates of Things are important metadata for personal
information management applications. Knowing about recent changes is an
important cue for users to retrieve documents. Many applications offer the
feature to show recent changes or ﬁlter by them. Consequently, it has to be
straightforward, simple, and fast to query for the modiﬁcation dates.
The NAO properties nao:created, nao:modified, and nao:lastModified
shall be used to track the change dates of Things. Creation and modiﬁ-
15Implementers may wonder why the range is not standardized as [0..1.0]. The recommended
range is based on an implementation decision taken in KDE.
16For a detailed representation of time events, refer to the NIE documentation, where timezones
are discussed (http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/04/02/ncal/#sec-tzd).
NIE represents time using the NcalDateTime class and its properties date, dateTime, ncalTimezone.
Timezones are represented using a Timezone class, that is inspired by RFC 2445.
17The XS namespace is http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema, but the two duration
datatypes are deﬁned in the XPath recommendation in 2007, see http://www.w3.org/TR/
xpath-functions/#dt-dayTimeDuration
18http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-xsch-datatypes/#section-duration Since XPath 2.0 has
become a W3C recommendation in January 2007, this note is partly obsoleted.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 13

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
cation allow only one, modiﬁcation allows multiple date values. Created and
lastModiﬁed values must be set for each Thing, at least one modiﬁed value
must be set. These values are intended for resources of type pimo:Thing,
pimo:Association, rdfs:Class, and rdf:Property when created by the user.
Example:
# Represent modification dates of a Thing
claudia:DirkHagemann
nao:created "2007-10-26T15:23:01";
nao:modified "2007-10-26T15:23:01";
nao:modified "2007-10-29T08:04:30";
nao:lastModified "2007-10-29T08:04:30".
The semantics of these dates is that the description of the Thing has changed,
facts about the Thing have been added, removed, or modiﬁed. Changes to
pimo:objectProperty(pimo:related, pimo:hasTag, etc.) orpimo:datatypeProperty
(name, address, label, etc.) imply such a modiﬁcation. Included are also
changes to the labels (nao:prefLabel, nao:altLabel, pimo:tagLabel). Modi-
ﬁcation of any other statement (such as pimo:definedBy, nao:modified) do
not imply a modiﬁcation nor a change of dates. As current RDF stores a priori
do not support automatic tracking of changes, applications have to implement
housekeeping of these dates, or use services for tracking. 19
6.11 Setting the Class of a Thing
All Things are of type pimo:Thing or one of its sub-classes. The PIMO ontology
itself deﬁnes several sub-classes such as pimo:Person or pimo:Organization.
If these are not speciﬁc enough, the user can either create new sub-classes
manually (see Section 6.19), or import group-level ontologies (Section 9).
As a rule of thumb, the question to be answered by assigning the class is “What
is this Thing?”. In comparison to OWL, where classes are commonly based on
the properties of the object (“vegetarians are entities not eating ﬂesh”) , classes
represent the type (the nature) alone.
It is also recommended to only use one explicit class for a Thing. The wish
to add multiple classes is often an indication that some classes can be better
modeled using relations. For example, it is recommended to use a datatype
property “is this person a vegetarian? yes or no” and explicitly set it instead of
assigning a sub-class of Person called Vegetarian. If Things with two classes
are needed (for example, if something is both a “Car” and a “Locatable”) then
the preferred way is to change the class model (make Car a subclass of
Locatable or create a new class “LocatableCar” with both as superclass) than
to add both types to one Thing. Nevertheless, it is not forbidden to add two
types.
When a Thing has occurrences that are expressed in the NEPOMUK Infor-
mation Element ontology (NIE), suitable mappings from NIE classes to PIMO
classes are available in a mapping ﬁle 20.
19The value of lastModiﬁed is redundant as it could be computed by sorting the modiﬁed dates
during query time, but this is not possible without nested SPARQL queries, a max() function, and
grouping, none of these part of the SPARQL standard. The stores that support such non-standard
operations still need time to compute the value. As the last modiﬁcation date is very important for
applications to assist users ﬁnding information, the redundancy is intended.
20http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/2007/11/01/nietopimomapping.rdf
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 14

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
6.12 The PIMO-upper ontology
PIMO contains an upper ontology for basic concepts in Personal Information
Management (PIM): Person, Location, Event, Organization, Topic, Document,
Time. They are modeled to answer basic questions about a Thing:
• Who is associated? Person
• Where is this? Location
• When is it? Time
• What is it about? Topic
The classes are the foundational part of PIMO in the Upper-Level Layer of the
overall NEPOMUK ontologies as shown in 1. This level serves as integration
point for PIM applications, in the broader perspective of the Semantic Desktop,
the classes can serve as upper classes for group– and domain–level ontologies
(see Sect. 9).
6.13 Classes in PIMO-Upper
The classes have been deﬁned based on related ontologies, a user study, and
several software prototypes that have been evaluated. Figure 4 gives a rough
overview of the available classes.
Thing The root class of the upper ontology. Every entity that can be in the
direct attention of the user is a Thing.
Collection A collection of Things, independent of their class. The items in the
collection share a common property. Several usability studies showed
that collections are important for PIM. It is recommended to either use
the pimo:hasPart or the pimo:isTagFor relation to connect a collection
with the Thing it contains21.
Group A group of Persons. They are connected to each other by sharing a
common attribute, for example they all belong to the same organization
or have a common interest.
Location A physical location. Sub-classes are modeled for the most common
locations humans work in: Building, City, Country, Room, State. This
selection is intended to be applicable cross-cultural and cross-domain.
City is a prototype that can be further reﬁned for villages, etc.
LogicalMediaType MediaConcepts are logical media types (e.g., a book, a
contract, a promotional video, a todo list). The user can create new
logical media types dependent on their domain: a salesman will need
MarketingFlyer, Offer, Invoice while a student might create Report, Thesis
and Homework.
Organization An administrative and functional structure (such as a business
or a political party).
Person Represents a person. Either living, dead, real or imaginary. In this
regards, similar to foaf:Person.
ProcessConcept Concepts that relate to a series of actions or operations
conducing to an end. Sub-classes are deﬁned for Event, SocialEvent,
Meeting, Project, and Task.
21A Risk Of Change: A clear recommendation to either property may follow in future versions
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 15

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Figure 4: Classes in PIMO-Upper
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 16

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Topic A topic is the subject of a discussion or document. Topics are distin-
guished from Things in their taxonomic nature, examples are scientiﬁc
areas.
Tag Tag is an abstract marker class to specify which Things in the user’s PIMO
should be considered useful tags in a tagging system. All Topics are Tags
(Topic is a subclass of Tag). Implementations should support the user by
using a useful set of Things as Tags, see Section 6.17.
These classes are intentionally kept generic. More specialized ontologies
should be used for certain domains of application, see Section 9. The classes
of these ontologies are then sub-classes of upper ontology classes.
6.14 Describing Things with Attributes and Relations
Conventional RDF statements are used to describe Things. Predicates have to
be deﬁned as rdfs:Properties according to the NRL standard. Alternatively,
it is also possible to use properties from other modeling languages like OWL or
RDFS although we do not encourage this without a proper mapping of existing
ontologies to PIMO (see 9).
Properties that are intended to be editable and visible to end users must be
sub-properties of either pimo:datatypeProperty or pimo:objectProperty.
Many NIE and NAO properties can be used from PIMO Things, see Sec-
tion 11.10.
6.15 Generic Properties in PIMO-Upper
The PIMO-upper ontology contains basic relations between Things and a few
core attributes for identifying them (described above in Sect. 6.4). These
sub-properties of pimo:objectProperty are:
pimo:related is the most generic relation, giving no further indication how
Things may be related. Related is deﬁned to have itself as inverse prop-
erty, it is indirectly a nrl:SymmetricProperty, but does not inherit this
attribute to sub-properties. Sub-properties can be asymmetric, depending
on the inverse-of relation they deﬁne.
pimo:hasPart and pimo:partOf model partitive relations. They are inverse.
Neither is transitive, because part-of relations used for modelling in the
domain of Personal Information Management are vague due to the many
contexts of interpretation (a hotel may be part of a trip plan, a trip plan
part of a project, but this does not indicate the hotel to be part of the
project).
pimo:hasTag and pimo:isTagFor connect a Thing of interest with a Tag char-
acterizing it. For example, a meeting can have a project as a tag, or a
document has a meeting as a tag, when the goal of the meeting is to
discuss the document. After the meeting, the meeting minutes are a new
Thing having the meeting as a tag. This is not restricted to meetings but
also an organization or a person can have a certain technology as a tag
to express that they are working on the topic described by the tag. The
relation is not transitive, not symmetric. It is not asymmetric because a
thing A may have thing B as tag, and B also A, if both are tags. The range
of the pimo:hasTag relation is restricted to the class pimo:Tag. Topic is a
subclass of tag. See Section 6.17.
Implementersmayusethesegenericpropertiesdirectly, orcreatesub-properties
ofthemorsub-propertiesofthemoregenericpimo:objectProperty. Themain
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 17

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
reason to have the generic properties is the semantic meaning of the relations,
which can help to create user interfaces or model domains. Ontology authors
can ask themselves “does a new property model a part-of relation or not, does
it assign a thing with a topic, or is it a generic relation?” and then extend one of
the generic properties.
For these generic relations, specialized sub-properties are deﬁned when used
on speciﬁc classes in the PIMO upper ontology.
6.16 Reﬁned properties in PIMO-Upper
Additional to the above relations, semantically interesting relations between
PIMO upper classes are modeled. Especially those which can be used as
symmetric or transitive relations for inference.
pimo:subTopic and pimo:superTopic relate Topics to each other. As Topics
are an important mean to organize document collections based on a
taxonomy, these two predicates are deﬁned. They are inverse of each
other and transitive.
pimo:hasOrganizationMember and pimo:isOrganizationMemberOf are rela-
tions connecting a Person to an Organization.
pimo:hasLocation and pimo:isLocationOf relate a locatable Thing with its
Location. Locatable is an abstract sub-class of Thing.
pimo:containsLocation and pimo:locatedWithin relate two locations within
each other. Note that for geographic locations representing a physical
space, inclusion is transitive.
6.17 Tagging Things with Tags
The generic properties described in the last Sections show how Things can
be related to each other. An important aspect of PIMO is to classify Things
using “Tags”. Compared to normal PIMO Things, Tags have one important
additional restriction to make them compatible with Tags from other tagging
system (folksonomies and Topic Maps):
• The label of a Tag is unique, within the scope of one Personal Information
Model.
Using Tags, PIMO can be used similar to an existing tagging system.
To extend a Thing to become a Tag, add the type pimo:Tag:
# The Person Dirk
claudia:DirkHagemann
a pimo:Person;
# also a Tag
a pimo:Tag;
# Must define the required pimo:tagLabel
pimo:tagLabel "Dirk Hagemann".
The pimo:tagLabel is required for all instances of pimo:Tag, and as it is a sub-
property of nao:prefLabel, it can replace an existing prefLabel. The intended
use of Tags is to build a clear category system for the user’s documents. Once
a Thing is tagged, it can be retrieved by ﬁnding ﬁrst the Tag, and then Things
associated with the Tag. A user’s Tags are good candidates as ﬁrst entry points
to explore a data space, they can be visualized in a tag cloud or an alphabetical
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 18

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
list. Tags can be clustered by type (each has an additional PIMO type), and by
hierarchy (Tags can be organized in a part-of hierarchy, Topics are organized in
a subTopic hierarchy).
To be useful as classiﬁcation system, there should be a limited number of Tags
to classify the potentially larger amount of documents. Examples are Things
which exist for a longer period of time and Things that are of much importance
to the user. Implementations should provide means to use the following as
Tags.
• All Topics can be considered Tags. This is expressed by the fact that
Topic is a subclass of Tag.
• Collections work well as Tags, the act of putting something into a collec-
tion can be considered an act of tagging.
• A person.
• A group of persons.
• A city, as there is a limited number of cities a person interacts with.
• Projects are deﬁned as an “enterprise carefully planned”, the planning
and execution of a project may involve tagging many Things as belonging
to the project.
• A task, as documents may be needed to fulﬁll the task.
• An organization to classify to which organization a person belongs or by
which organization a document was published.
The process of using an existing Thing as Tag may be automated. For example,
a user searching for a possible Tag for a document should be able to pick from
a list of existing Tags, and additionally search for Things of the above type to
convert them to a Tag (such as a “more Tags” button). The conversion from
Thing to Tag may then be automated and not visible to the user.
Tagging a document is illustrated in the following example, for more details refer
to Section 11.7.
claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage a claudia:MeetingPackage, pimo:Tag;
pimo:tagLabel "Belfast Meeting Package".
claudia:BelfastBusTimetable a pimo:Document;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf>;
pimo:hasTag claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage.
In general, it should be avoided to use pimo:Document instances as Tags.
Typically the amount of documents is high, making them less useful as cat-
egorization scheme compared to the above mentioned Thing classes. The
reason to introduce Tags in PIMO is to allow implementers to separate between
categorization scheme and annotated instance base (which is usually a docu-
ment corpus). Without a class to mark Tags, it would not be possible to restrict
the pimo:tagLabel predicate to a minimum cardinality of one, and also Topics
could not automatically be deﬁned as Tags.
6.18 Topic Hierarchies
The methodologies so far allow the description of individual Things with labels,
properties, classes, and Tags. Besides the view on individuals, their place
inside an overall organization scheme of the user can be important — where
is a Thing located in a hierarchy? Things can be placed in a hierarchy using
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 19

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
the pimo:hasPart relation. In an overall hierarchy, the part relation can be
confusing, as Things both have a class and can be part of something. For
example, workpackage 2 is part of the CID project. In a combined hierarchy
including class and part-of relations, it would appear at two positions: as
instance of workpackage and as part of CID.
To simplify the system for novice users, it is recommended for implementers
to support a Topic Hierarchy, where hierarchical part-of structures are shown
to end-users. The semantic “is-a” relations should be hidden in the Topic
hierarchy. This allows users to model parts of their PIMO as taxonomy.
• Each instance of pimo:Topic must either have a pimo:hasSuperTopic
relationtoanotherTopicorbedeﬁnedasrootTopicusingpimo:hasRootTopic.
• All Topics must be connected (indirectly or directly) to a root Topic, or be
a root Topic themselves.
• User interfaces should render Topics using the hierarchical structure.
• Cycles in the super-topic structure are allowed but should be avoided.
• A Topic can have multiple super Topics, PIMO allows poly-hierarchical
structures.
• The pimo:subTopic and pimo:superTopic relations are deﬁned transi-
tive.
• When displaying Topics in hierarchical user interfaces, the transitivity of
pimo:subTopic should not be inferred. The user experience should be
the same when modelling and when browsing the hierarchy.
• When searching for Things using the pimo:hasTag relation, the transitivity
of pimo:subTopic should be inferred, see below.
To support semantic search in Topic hierarchies, the following rule for tagging
does apply when searching for Things using the hasTag relation (for a detailled
description, see Section 12):
CONSTRUCT
{?x pimo:hasTag ?B.}
WHERE
{?x pimo:hasTag ?A.
?A pimo:superTopic ?B.}
The hierarchical structure of Topics in PIMO is comparable to the modeling in
SKOS[8]. Thepimo:subTopicrelationisequivalenttoskos:narrowerTransitive.
PIMO requires all Topics to be connected to root Topics, SKOS does not require
this in the semantics of skos:hasTopConcept.
6.19 Creating Personalized Classes and Properties
The predeﬁned classes and properties are intended as a generic basis to be
extended. The user can always create new classes and property types, or
existing ontologies can be imported (see Section 8). A number of requirements
apply:
• The superclass has to be pimo:Thing or a sub-class.
• The class has to be labelled with nao:prefLabel.
• The class has to be related to the user’s PIMO with pimo:isDefinedBy.
Similarly for custom properties:
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 20

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
• The property has to be labelled with nao:prefLabel.
• Thepropertyhastoberelatedtotheuser’sPIMOwithpimo:isDefinedBy.
For properties that relate two things, the following applies:
• The property must be a sub-property of pimo:objectProperty (either
directly or indirectly via inference).
• Thesuper-propertyshouldbeoneofpimo:related, pimo:hasTag, pimo:isTagFor,
pimo:hasPart, or pimo:partOf.
• An inverse property must be deﬁned. Inverse properties deﬁne the
semantic meaning in both ways, which is required for user interfaces
showing relations.
For custom properties that have a literal or datatype as range the following
applies:
• They must be a sub-property of pimo:datatypeProperty.
• Inverse properties should not be deﬁned (as Literals cannot be subject of
statements, inverse does not apply anyway).
For all custom-created properties and classes, modiﬁcation dates must be set.
6.20 Collections of Things
In Personal Information Management, grouping multiple Things into one collec-
tion is a crucial feature. Today’s hierarchical ﬁle systems are a good example:
a folder can be created to contain multiple elements. Later, actions on this
folder, such as compressing it, or deleting it are supported. The generic has
Part relation provides the semantics of putting a Thing into another Thing. For
usability reasons, we also provide a class pimo:Collection to be used for
generic collections of multiple items.
Applications that want to present the complex possibilities of PIMO in a simpler
way can offer collections. First, an instance of the class pimo:Collection is
created. Then, elements are added to the collection using the pimo:hasPart
relation. A typical application of collections is the list of “Favourites” containing
recently used and important resources.
Collections are unordered, the ordering of items inside the collection can be
done using alphabetical order, time, geographic location (if they are locatable),
or type.
Tags are another simpliﬁcation, described below in Section 11.7.
6.21 Modeling Associations and Roles in PIMO
Often there is a need to add meta-data about a relation, for example the date
of creation of a relation. In RDF, this is typically done using reiﬁcation, and then
adding meta-data about the reiﬁed Statement using an instance of the class
rdf:Statement. A problem with reiﬁcation is that when using the generic class
rdf:Statement to represent it, there are no guidelines which properties are
now suitable to annotate the statement. More precise sub-classes of Statement
would solve this. Another problem is that n-ary relations cannot be expressed
with triple statements.
In PIMO, Associations are used to add metadata about relations and to create
n-ary relations. They are entities representing the relation of multiple Things
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 21

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
with each other. Each Thing part of an Association is related to the association
using the pimo:associationMember property or more precise sub-properties
of it.
As an example, the fact that Claudia attended a meeting can be expressed
using the pimo:Attendee role.
claudia:AttendsInitialMeetinginBelfast a pimo:Attendee;
pimo:attendingMeeting claudia:InitialMeetinginBelfast;
pimo:roleHolder claudia:Claudia.
Here, the class pimo:Attendee is a sub-class of pimo:Association and repre-
sents the association as such (“this is an association between a person and a
meeting”). Thetworelationsusedaresub-propertiesofpimo:associationMember
and identify the two Things to relate, the speciﬁc relations determine the role
taken by each Thing. New sub-classes of association can be created when
needed, also new sub-properties of pimo:associationMember for more spe-
ciﬁc roles.
Associations are elements of a user’s PIMO and must be connected to the
user’s PIMO with a pimo:isDefinedBy relation. Modiﬁcation dates are to be
handled the same way as with Things (see Section 6.10).
7 Connecting PIMO to Information Elements
In the last section, the Things created within a user-PIMO were described.
They are to be unique, described with deﬁned ontologies, and ought to be
identiﬁed well. The next step is to connect these to the ﬁles, e-mails, and
other Information Elements which exist in the user’s PSI. These are ambiguous,
described in various ontologies, and in general more chaotic when compared
to the user-PIMO. The crucial point is to use Things as organization scheme to
classify and integrate existing data found in a PSI.
The ﬁrst step is to connect Things to Information Elements that represent
them. As described above (Section 6.4), the pimo:groundingOccurrence and
pimo:occurrence relations are to be used to connect them. This connec-
tion has the semantics of a uniﬁcation — both the Thing and the Information
Element represent the same real-world entity. But the Thing is the unique,
static representation that should be used to annotate the entity. Implemen-
tations should not allow the users to annotate Information Elements directly,
instead it is recommended to connect the Information Element to a Thing
using pimo:groundingOccurrence and then annotate the Thing. The rationale
is that Information Elements can change their URI, be deleted or moved, and
then the annotations may be disconnected from the described resource.
Creating a Thing for each annotated document will result in vast amounts
of instances in the sub-classes of pimo:Document, as users can likely have
access to thousands (sometimes millions) of documents. To navigate effectively
through such large structures, PIMO Topics can be used to annotate documents
using the pimo:hasTag relation.
How to annotate documents using PIMO is described in Section 11.7.
7.1 Connecting Things and Classes to Folders
Things can also be connected to folders in the ﬁle-system to express that
these folders contain information related to the thing. Use the pimo:hasFolder
relation to connect a Thing or a Class with a folder. The semantic meaning of
this relation is not formally restricted but open to be used in various ways. For
folders connected to Things, it is recommended to interpret the content of the
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 22

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
folder as “having the Thing as topic”. Implementers may add a pimo:hasTag
relation between the Things inside the folder and the Thing.
For folders connected to Classes, it is recommended to interpret the content
of the folder as “being an instance of the Class”. Implementers may add a
rdf:type relation between the Things inside the folder and the Class.
In all cases, ﬁles or other information elements in folders have to be represented
as Things ﬁrst, before further annotation (see Section 11.1).
The property pimo:hasFolder can be used by implementers to suggest folders
for information elements — if an information element is annotated with a
pimo:hasTag relation to a topic that is connected to a folder, this is an indication
to move the element to the folder, if needed.
7.2 Integrating Facts about Things
The uniﬁcation of multiple Information Elements into one Thing is also on the
level of facts, RDF statements. To answer the question “when did I last com-
municate with people shown on this picture” can only be answered when facts
from multiple sources (e-mails, photos, photo annotations and the user-PIMO)
can be queried as one model. The statements about the Information Elements
connected to a Thing via pimo:groundingOccurrence and pimo:occurrence
can be superimposed to the Thing. The exact rules are given in Section 12.1
and directions how to use them are in Section 11.6.
Through this process, a view on the data is generated. The user can get an
overview of all existing data — in an integrated way — and then drill down into
speciﬁc occurrences. In this view, it is possible that a Thing has multiple classes
(as rdf:type), one from the level of PIMO ontologies and others from the inte-
grated Information Elements. In the example given in Section 11.6, Dirk Hage-
mann is inferred to be both a pimo:Person and a pimo:PersonContact. The
two classes are not required to be sub-classes of each other. To get a coherent
and meaningful view, the class of the InformationElement (or related resource)
may be related to a PIMO class using the pimo:hasOtherConceptualization
relation, as described later in Section 9.
It is not required that the used ontologies are formally aligned and mapped.
Rather, it is assumed that the user will be able to interpret the statements
based on his knowledge about the data in his PSI.
The details about the integration of facts are given in Section 11.6 on uniﬁcation.
8 PIMO-group level: Group and Domain ontologies
The upper (foundational) level of PIMO just makes a few, basic ontological state-
ments about Things which exist on a Semantic Desktop, i.e., Things which are
essential in a knowledge worker’s mental model. In order to avoid a cold start
problem 22 with PIMO-based applications, more ontologies deﬁning concepts
shared within groups or modeling domains are needed. The user’s company
and its organizational structure may be such a domain, or a shared public
ontology. Classes are reﬁnements of PIMO-Upper, allowing an integration of
various domain ontologies via the upper layer.
In the following section, recommendations are given how to model group and
domain level ontologies.
22The problem of cold starts is well known in knowledge-based systems: In the beginning a
system, such as a shell, has little or no information and therefore doesn’t seem to be useful to a
new user. Consequently, they are not motivated to invest in using and feeding the system with new
information, which again would be a prerequisite for it to be more useful. Enter vicious cycle...
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 23

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
9 Extending PIMO
Out of the box, PIMO is kept sufﬁciently simple and only contains relatively few
classes and properties. This was done in order to ensure that the ontology
is general enough to apply to almost any relevant domain. However, as soon
as the set of pre-existing classes and properties becomes too narrow and
conﬁning, it is a very simple matter to extend PIMO and add domain-speciﬁc
extensions, or map external ontologies onto PIMO. E.g., PIMO can easily be
extended to express the organizational structure of the user’s workplace, a
biological classiﬁcation system, or to include a PIMO-version of the BibTeX
vocabulary. These domain ontologies differ from personalized classes and
properties (see Section 6.19) by the fact that they are not created by the user,
but created by a third party for multiple users.
9.1 Reﬁning Elements of PIMO-upper
Creating group–level ontologies is a simple matter of deﬁning new sub-
classesofPIMO-upperclasses(seeSect.6.13)orsub-classingInformationElement
classes. If needed, new properties can also be added, which apply to the new
classes via domain or range. Importing created group–level ontologies into a
user’s PIMO is described in the next Section (10).
Classes As an example, you may work in the domain of teaching and training,
and therefore want to extend PIMO with elements speciﬁc for this domain, such
as courses, lessons, teachers or students. In this case, you would look for
existing PIMO-upper classes which could be considered generalizations of your
new classes. E.g., a course would be a sub-class of pimo:ProcessConcept,
training lessons could be a sub-class of pimo:Meeting, teachers and students
could be sub-classes of pimo:Person (or pimo:Role — role-based modeling is
discussed in Sect. 6.21) and training material a sub-class of pimo:Document.
Since all pre-existing PIMO-upper classes derive from pimo:Thing, all your
new classes automatically do as well (except for roles: pimo:Role is not a
sub-class of pimo:Thing).
There could also be cases where no existing PIMO-upper class seems to
apply to your new class — in this case, the new class would directly derive
from pimo:Thing. Consider, e.g., that you want to include the concept of
grades in your PIMO. There isn’t really a good pre-existing superclass for
grades in PIMO-upper, so your new Grade class would be a direct sub-class of
pimo:Thing.
Even if there might be a potential superclass, it may be wise to postpone this
decision if one isn’t completely sure, and instead just sub-class pimo:Thing. It
is always easier to add a superclass relationship later, rather than make a bad
decision now and then have to deal with incorrect data at a later stage.
If needed, the new classes can also have sub-class relationships into other on-
tologies, such as other NIE-based ontologies or completely different ontologies
such as WordNet23, SUMO24, or Dolce25.
Instances In some cases, you will also want to add instances of classes
to the ontology you are integrating with PIMO. This makes sense if those
instances are shared and used among a many users. An example are actual
grades that a teacher might gives their students, such as grades from A–F.
Each such grade (teaching:GradeA, teaching:GradeB, etc.) is an instance
23http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
24http://www.ontologyportal.org/
25http://www.loa-cnr.it/DOLCE.html
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 24

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
of the class Grade, but since those instances will be used by all teachers and
students, they can become part of the teaching ontology. Similarly, if a school
decides to introduce the teaching ontology, they might include instances for all
their teachers, students, classes, courses, etc.
Properties New properties can then refer to the new classes via domain
or range and thus further specify them. Examples are the relation between
courses and teachers/instructors (e.g., teachesCourse(Teacher, Course)) or
betweencoursematerialandacourse(e.g. courseMaterialFor(CourseMaterial,
Course)). This example is illustrated graphically in Fig. 5, as well in N3 source
code in Fig. 6. This approach is a typical example of how to integrate
domain ontologies for speciﬁc application areas into PIMO.
There are some general guidelines for introducing new properties:
• Properties which connect two pimo:Things (or sub-classes) should be de-
ﬁned as sub-properties of pimo:related, pimo:hasTag, pimo:isTagFor,
pimo:hasPart, or pimo:partOf (see Sect. 6.15). By relating new, spe-
cialized properties to the more generic PIMO properties, the new ontology
can integrate better with existing desktop environment. When not ex-
tending the generic properties, at least new properties should exted
pimo:objectProperty.
• All new object-properties must deﬁne an inverse property, as required in
Section 6.19.
• Identifying properties (such as a name) that have domain pimo:Thing and
a literal range should be mapped as sub-properties of nao:identifier.
An example is give in Fig. 8.
• Somenewpropertiesmaybedeﬁnedassub-propertiesofpimo:referencingOccurrence
(see Sect. 6.4). This is true for all object properties (i.e., properties which
have a resource range and not a literal range) which describe or identify
the subject in an unambiguous way. In other words, the object resource
exclusively describes the subject. A typical example is foaf:homepage:
two different people would most likely not have the same homepage
(ignoring exceptions such as family homepages). If, however, we come
across two different RDF resources which have the same foaf:homepage,
we can assume that they describe the same real-life person.
• A frequent situation in Semantic Web and Semantic Desktop scenar-
ios is that the same real-life object (i.e., a person, country, project,
etc.) is deﬁned as a resource in many different ontologies. The PIMO
property pimo:hasOtherRepresentation is used in such cases. If your
new ontology contains a property which expresses a similar (more spe-
ciﬁc) relation between resources, then it should be a sub-property of
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation (see Sect. 6.4). In the vanilla SW world,
a similar property is rdfs:seeAlso.
Inheritance Sub-classing any class from PIMO (whether it be existing classes
from PIMO-upper or classes that have been added later) also means that the
new sub-class can be used with the same properties that have been deﬁned
with its superclass. Remember that NRL has a closed world assumption, and
not an open world assumption, as RDFS traditionally has. In NRL26, ontologies
can be used to validate statements. E.g., if the property name(pimo:Person,
String) has been deﬁned, and if we deﬁne our new class teaching:Student
to be a sub-class of pimo:Person, then this will allow us to use name with
instances of Student as well - an NRL validator will permit this, because
26http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nrl/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 25

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
pimo:
Person
pimo:
Process
Concept
pimo:
Document
pimo:
Meeting
pimo:
Thing
teaching:
Lesson
teaching:
Course
Material
teaching:
Course
teaching:
Teacher
teaching:
Student
(Relation simpliﬁed)
teaching:
teachesCourse
teaching:
attendsCourse
teaching:
courseMaterialForteaching:
Grade
teaching:
GradeA
teaching:
GradeB
instance of
subclass of
Figure 5: Extending PIMO with new classes, properties and instances for the
domain of teaching
all instances of Student are also instances of Person. An example of this
is shown in Fig. 7: this concept is very similar to the idea of inheritance in
object-orientation, even though strictly speaking it is not the same.
9.2 Markup for the new ontology
The teaching ontology still needs to be deﬁned as proper NRL ontology to be
usable with PIMO. The ontology must to be identiﬁed via its URI and the author
of the ontology can be added as nao:creator.
teaching:TeachingOntology a nrl:Ontology;
nao:creator teaching:TeachingOntologyCreator.
teaching:TeachingOntologyCreator a nao:Party;
rdfs:label "Knud Möller".
9.3 Information Elements
An important feature of the NEPOMUK ontology architecture is the fact that
it is divided into two tiers: the PIMO tier and the Native Structures tier, as
deﬁned in the NEPOMUK Information Element Ontology (NIE)27 and its sub-
ontologies, such as the NEPOMUK File Ontology (NFO)28. While the former
covers the internal mental model of a user or an organization (people, events,
projects, etc.), the latter covers the physical representations of data (address
book entries, calendar entries, ﬁles, etc.). Obviously, there are numerous
connections between the tiers: people are represented by address book entries,
events appear in the calendar, projects have ﬁles associated to them.
Whenever classes that are introduced to PIMO have a physical representation
on the user’s desktop, a connection to NIE must be modeled as well. Consider
the example of the teaching ontology above: Such an ontology will contain
27http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nie/
28http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/nfo/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 26

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
# new classes:
teaching:Grade a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Thing.
teaching:Student a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Person.
teaching:Teacher a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Person.
teaching:CourseMaterial a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Document.
teaching:Course a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:ProcessConcept.
teaching:Lesson a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Meeting.
# new properties and their inverse:
teaching:courseMaterialFor a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:partOf;
rdfs:domain teaching:CourseMaterial;
rdfs:range teaching:Course;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:hasCourseMaterial.
teaching:hasCourseMaterial;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:hasPart;
rdfs:domain teaching:Course;
rdfs:range teaching:CourseMaterial;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:courseMaterialFor.
teaching:teachesCourse a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:related;
rdfs:domain teaching:Teacher;
rdfs:range teaching:Course;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:taughtBy.
teaching:taughtBy a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:related;
rdfs:domain teaching:Course;
rdfs:range teaching:Teacher;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:teachesCourse.
teaching:attendsCourse a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:related;
rdfs:domain teaching:Student;
rdfs:range teaching:Course;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:attendeeStudent.
teaching:attendeeStudent a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:related;
rdfs:domain teaching:Course;
rdfs:range teaching:Student;
nrl:inverseProperty teaching:attendsCourse.
# new instances:
teaching:GradeA a teaching:Grade;
nao:prefLabel "A".
teaching:GradeB a teaching:Grade;
nao:prefLabel "B".
...
Figure 6: Extending PIMO with new classes, properties and instances for the
domain of teaching — N3 codeTask Force Ontologies Version 1.0 27

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
pimo:name a rdf:Property;
rdfs:Domain pimo:Person;
rdfs:Domain rdfs:Literal.
teaching:Student a rdfs:Class;
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Person.
knud a teaching:Student;
pimo:name "Knud Möller".
Figure 7: “Inheritance” of properties
classes for Things like exams and essays. Those classes belong to the PIMO
tier. Their representation within the computer — e.g., as text ﬁles — belongs
to the native structures tier. Or, in a more complex case, the new ontology
could very well come with a specialized application, such as a Training Course
Manager, where users can assign attendees to trainings, etc. In this case,
people and courses (PIMO tier) would be represented by the application as
application-speciﬁc data structures or information elements (native structures
tier). In both cases a link from the new PIMO classes to the information
elements represented with NIE is required to fully exploit the possibilities of the
semantic desktop.
As a second example, we can consider an ontology for scientiﬁc publica-
tions. This ontology (which would probably be based on BibTEX), would
come with classes such as Article or Book and relations between them like
bookContainsArticle or hasAuthor. For the integration into PIMO, Article
would most likely become a sub-class of pimo:Document. Documents have two
types: one which anchors them in the PIMO tier, and one which anchors them
in the native structures tier. The pimo:LogicalMediaType (and its sub-classes,
e.g., pimo:Document) captures how a document is interpreted by the user and
belongs to the PIMO tier. Logical media types can be contracts, invoices, as-
signments, invitations, law texts, etc. The other type, which is the nfo:Document
type, captures how the system interprets the document, and belongs to the
native structures tier. This is the physical document type as modeled by NIE.
Instances of a logical media type can have various representations in the na-
tive structures tier: for example, a text interpreted as an invoice by the user
can either be an nfo:PlainTextDocument or an nfo:PaginatedTextDocument.
Vice-versa, one physical type can be used to represent both an invitation or an
invoice, which are different logical media types. Keeping this this separation of
content and representation in mind, one can model concrete documents having
two types, one on each tier.
9.4 Extension by Sub-classing from External Classes
Another possibility is extending existing PIMO-upper classes by sub-
classing them from external classes. This is discouraged. For example,
if the class pimo:Person was deﬁned a sub-class of nco:PersonContact and
pimo:Organization a sub-class of nco:OrganizationContact, all instances
of these classes would automatically be inferred to be pimo:Things. However,
those instances would probably not have some of the properties required by
the Thing deﬁned, which would render the imported data invalid. Similarly,
when a mapped class X has cardinality restrictions on its properties (such as
required properties), adding X as new superclass to an existing PIMO class
can render the instances of the PIMO class invalid.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 28

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
bibtex:Article a rdfs:Class;
# PIMO tier: interpreted by the user as nie:Document
rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Document;
# native structures tier: interpreted by the system as nfo:TextDocument
rdfs:subClassOf nfo:TextDocument.
bibtex:hasAuthor a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:related;
rdfs:subPropertyOf nfo:creator;
rdfs:domain bibtex:Article;
rdfs:range pimo:Person.
bibtex:hasLCCN a rdf:Property;
rdfs:subPropertyOf nao:identifier; \# add an identifier
rdfs:domain bibtex:Article.
Figure 8: A BibTEX-based PIMO extension for scientiﬁc publications
9.5 Summary
The very condensed summary to extending PIMO and mapping frome existing
ontologies to PIMO is the following:
• Make classes sub-classes of PIMO-upper classes.
• Make properties sub-properties of PIMO-upper properties.
• Relations: Links between Things have to be browseable, properties
should have inverse relations deﬁned (see [17])
• Extensibility: Users are free to add new relation types and new classes
(see [17])
10 Importing Domain Ontologies into a User’s PIMO
Once modeled, the new domain ontology such as the teaching ontology in
the previous examples can be made available publicly for others, for example
by publishing it on the Web. A good reference for doing this is Best Practice
Recipes for Publishing RDF Vocabularies [13].
Semantically, an imported ontology is captured using a nrl:imports statement.
When a user imports a domain ontology, this statement should be added.
claudia:Pimo nrl:imports teaching:TeachingOntology.
Once the user of a Semantic Desktop system imports an external PIMO into
their own desktop, all new classes (which are sub-classes of pimo:Thing)
should become available to them as if they had created those classes them-
selves. Instances, on the other hand, are not automatically available. As said
in the introduction, the scope of a PIMO for an individual user is to model data
that is within their own attention and needed for knowledge work or private
use. However, when importing external ontologies or knowledge bases, not
all instances may be of interest to the user. As with imported information
elements, a separate Thing is created to represent the imported resource
within the PIMO of the user and connected to the imported instance using
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation29. Before creating a new Thing for an im-
ported instance, the PIMO of the user has to be checked if the entity is already
29An alternative would be to treat all Things present in the RDF data available of the user as if
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 29

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
represented as a Thing, as indicated above in Section 11.1. Once represented
as a Thing in the user’s PIMO, it is possible to assign a personal identiﬁer to it,
annotate it, and use it.
Implementations must automate the importing process. The user should be
able to interact with imported Things as if they were created by themselves.
11 Practical Directions on Using PIMO
In this section, a few issues that will arise in actual PIMO usage are discussed.
For each of these issues, we will suggest a recommended way of handling them.
Even though those things are not strictly speaking part of the ontology, they
are part of the standard deﬁning how to use the PIMO ontology in applications.
Implementers should conform to these directions.
11.1 Creating Things
New PIMO Things can be created freely, but usually the creation of a Thing is
rooted in the existence of an information element. An algorithm to create new
Things based on information elements should follow these steps:
Start The software agent encounters a resource with URI X and wants to
verify if the user already has knowledge about X.
Check GroundingOccurrence Query the user-PIMO for:
SELECT ?thing WHERE {?thing pimo:groundingOccurrence ?X.}
When a Thing is found, ﬁnished.
Check occurrences Repeat the last step to search if X is an occurrence of
a Thing.
Check identiﬁers Validate if the InformationElement has an identiﬁer or a
referencing occurrence that is also used on an existing Thing. The information
element is called an occurrence of a Thing when it shares the same identiﬁers.
The correct query is:
SELECT ?thing
WHERE {
?thing ?p ?o.
?X ?p ?o.
?p rdfs:subPropertyOf nao:identifier.
} UNION {
?thing ?p ?o.
?X ?p ?o.
?p rdfs:subPropertyOf pimo:referencingOccurrence.
}
When a Thing is found, ﬁnished.
they were created by the user, imported or not. This has the drawback that it allows to represent
the same real-world entity twice, ﬁrst in the imported domain ontology and second in the user’s
own PIMO.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 30

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Create a new Thing When the last step did not return an existing Thing,
this can be an indicator that element X is new to the user and should be
modeled with a new Thing. Mint a new URI and add the identity values from
the InformationElement.
In the following SPARQL query example, we assume that Claudia’s System
has just encountered a new calendar event X and represents it using the new
minted URI claudia : Event42.
CONSTRUCT {
<claudia:Event42> rdf:type pimo:Thing.
<claudia:Event42> ?i ?io.
<claudia:Event42> nao:prefLabel ?title.
<claudia:Event42> rdf:type ?type.
<claudia:Event42> rdf:type ?pimotype.
<claudia:Event42> pimo:groundingOccurrence ?X.
<claudia:Event42> nao:created ``2007-06-30T18:11:00Z''.
<claudia:Event42> pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO.
} WHERE {
OPTIONAL (?X ?i ?io. ?i rdfs:subPropertyOf nao:identifier.).
OPTIONAL (?X nie:title ?title).
OPTIONAL (?X rdf:type ?type).
OPTIONAL (?X rdf:type ?type. ?pimotype rdfs:subClassOf ?type.
?pimotype rdfs:subClassOf pimo:Thing).
}
The different parts of this query are:
• all identiﬁers are copied (?i, ?io)
• the title is copied for readability and to use it for tagging (?title)
• the original type(s) are copied (?type)
• ﬁnd possible PIMO:Thing classes that can be used for this type (?pimo-
type)
• the groundingOccurrence relation is added
• the created timestamp is set to the current date
• the isDeﬁnedBy relation is set
Finding a suitable class to represent the resource in the PIMO depends on a
mapping of information element classes to PIMO classes and can be realized
in different ways, see Section 6.11.
11.2 Changing the Type of a Thing
Changing the type of an instance can lead to invalid statements in the knowl-
edge base. E.g., this can happen when the instance in question is involved in
statements using a property with a speciﬁc domain and range, and the new
type is not compatible to those. As this would render the model invalid, this
situation must be avoided in applications interacting with PIMO data. A user
interface should remind the user of possible problems and should suggest
solutions.
A different approach is ontology-by-examples where the main principles is that
“the user is always right” and domain/range values are not explicitly set but
implied by previous usage. User interfaces may support this behavior by setting
the domain and range to pimo:Thing and suggest properties suitable for class
by analysing previous usage of the property.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 31

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
11.3 Deleting a Thing
Wecansaythat, inRDF,instancesdonotexistindependently, butonlyaspartof
statements. Thus, “deleting an instance” really means deleting all statements
in which this instance is involved (as subject or object). If the instance
has a grounding occurrence relation, a new pimo:groundingForDeletedThing
relation should be created to record the deletion. Data integration algorithms
analysing resource to automatically create Things can then avoid re-creating
the already deleted Thing.
11.4 Deleting User-generated Classes and Properties
Deleting a user-generated class is allowed but requires that instances are
re-typed to the direct super-class of the deleted class. Also the domains and
ranges of all properties deﬁned with the class as domain or range need to be
changed to the direct superclass. These changes are necessary to prevent the
model from becoming invalid. Classes deﬁned in the pimo language cannot be
deleted, only classes deﬁned by the user can be deleted.
The direct super-class S of the class C is deﬁned as the class where no other
class T exists where C has superclass T and T has superclass S. If there are
multiple S, all of them should be used as replacement when deleting a class.
If user-generated properties are deleted, this requires all statements in which
those properties are involved to be deleted as well, in order to prevent the
model to become invalid. Alternatively, all occurrences of the property could be
replaced by its super-property.
11.5 Merging Duplicates
Duplicates are two Things that represent the same real-world entity within
a user’s PIMO. As we apply the unique name assumption (two Things with
different names are different), duplicates should be found and corrected. When
duplicates are found, both (the “duplicate” and the “original”) can be merged into
one single instance. In this process, RDF statements involving the duplicate are
changed so that they now refer to the original. In a local setup with one desktop
and all data stored in a single database, this process is without information loss
and causes no side-effects. As Semantic Web applications are in a distributed
scenario, deleting a duplicate resource can cause dangling links in related
databases and other side-effects.
For this, the pimo:hasDeprecatedRepresentation property should be used
to relate the original with the (now deleted) duplicate. Note that the range of
this property is not deﬁned, as all data about the duplicate resource (including
the type) is deleted.
When merging two duplicate resource A and B into one resource C, a few
practical guidelines can reduce side-effects:
• TheURIofC iseitherAorB, theolderresource(asdeﬁnedbynao:creationDate,
see Section 6.10) is to be preferred as it has a higher chance of being
used.
• The classes of C are the union of the classes of A and B.
• All statements about A and B are merged to C.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 32

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
11.6 Uniﬁcation of multiple Information Elements into one Thing
In comparison to merging duplicate Things, uniﬁcation is the process when
multiple information elements representing the same real-world entity are
mapped to one pimo:Thing instance.
In PIMO, multiple information elements representing one real-world entity are
mappedtoexactlyonepimo:Thinginstanceusingthepimo:groundingOccurrence
and pimo:occurrence relations. Algorithms or user interfaces implementing
uniﬁcation must consider the identifying properties of a Thing (see Section 6.4)
when searching for possible Things to representing information elements.
Four default NRL Views and NRL ViewSpeciﬁcations are deﬁned for different
levels of inference. Each creates a named graph that contains the instance
data and the inferred statements.
pimo:InferOccurrences aviewthatinfersoccurrencesbasedonnie:identifiers
and pimo:referencingOccurrence annotations.
pimo:GroundingClosure a view that adds statements about the grounding
Occurrences and hasOtherRepresentation to a Thing.
pimo:OccurrenceClosure a view that adds statements about all occurrences
to a Thing.
pimo:FullPimoView a supergraph of all above.
By providing these graphs, we let the user and software agent decide if the full
closure is needed at all times. When no closure is needed, the plain NRL data
graphs can be used as-is. To answer complex queries like “Which e-mails were
sent to me by attendees of meetings that I have today”, the full closure is a
good choice.
The ability to superimpose data using inference limits the data needed in a
PIMO to a necessary minimum: only the identiﬁcation properties are manda-
tory, the occurrence and the hasOtherRepresentation properties superimpose
existing data.
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:occurrence <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk>.
Using the guiding example, an integrated view of Claudia on Paul is the follow-
ing, assuming full closure:
# The canonical Dirk
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
# the second type is also inferred
a nco:PersonContact;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
nao:prefLabel 'Dirk Hagemann';
nao:identifier "dirk@example.com";
pimo:occurrence <imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1#from>;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/dirk.vcf#dirk>;
pimo:referencingOccurrence <http://www.example.com/people/DirkHagemann>;
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation <http://id.example.com/person/1650>;
# the inferred facts
nco:hasEmailAddress <mailto:dirk@example.com>;
nco:nameFamily "Hagemann";
nco:nameGiven "Dirk";
nco:photo <http://www.example.com/people/dirk/photo.jpg>.
# E-mail, now pointing to the canonical Dirk
<imap://claudia@example.com/INBOX/1> a nmo:Mail;
nmo:from claudia:DirkHagemann.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 33

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
11.7 Tagging and Annotating Files
Conceptually, once an Information Element (a ﬁle, an e-mail, a webpage, an
address book entry, etc.) is in the attention of the user and is read or annotated,
it is also a Thing in the mental model of the user. A core idea of the Semantic
Desktop is to use other Things as dimensions to annotate ﬁles and retrieve
them later, as described in [6].
Lets assume the ﬁle /home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf is to be tagged with
the tag “Belfast Meeting Package”.
A representation of the ﬁle is already extracted by the semantic desktop data
wrapper system (or any other content management system):
<file://home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf> a nie:TextDocument;
nie:language "en";
nie:title "Belfast Bus Timetable".
Additionally, the city of Belfast and the Belfast meeting package already exist
in the model, as well as a MeetingPackage class (which was either created by
Claudia, or came as part of a shared domain/group ontology):
claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage a claudia:MeetingPackage, pimo:Tag;
pimo:tagLabel "Belfast Meeting Package";
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO.
To add a simple tag, the ﬁle is now represented as a Thing (thingiﬁed) and the
tagging relation set.
claudia:BelfastBusTimetable a pimo:Document;
nao:prefLabel "Belfast Bus Timetable";
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf>;
nao:hasTag claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage.
The interested reader may now ask, “but why create a new Thing and not just
add the nao:hasTag relation directly to the ﬁle?” The reason to thingify the
ﬁle is twofold: ﬁrst, it is possible to assign a new class to the ﬁle, for example
creating the class claudia:BusTimetable. Second, the same timetable may
be available in different data objects, if it is stored in an e-mail attachment, a
web resource, or a local ﬁle — it is always the same document. A tag added
to one occurrence of the ﬁle is also valid for other occurrences. Also refer to
Sections 7,9.3.
Given Claudia ﬁnds the same timetable on a website, the system can link the
two based on nie:identifiers (which should be globally unique identiﬁers for
information elements, independent of the data object they are stored in). This
example shows this case (with copied identiﬁers):
# the file on the harddisk
<file://home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf> a nie:TextDocument;
nie:language "en";
nie:title "Belfast Bus Timetable";
# this isbn is fictional
nie:identifier "ISBN:12123-123123".
<http://www.buseireann.ie/timetables/belfast.pdf>
a nie:TextDocument;
nie:title "Belfast Bus Timetable";
# this isbn is fictional
nie:identifier "ISBN:12123-123123".
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 34

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
claudia:BelfastBusTimetable a pimo:Document;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO;
pimo:groundingOccurrence <file://home/claudia/doc/tripplan.pdf>;
pimo:occurrence <http://www.buseireann.ie/timetables/belfast.pdf>;
nie:identifier "ISBN:12123-123123";
pimo:hasTag claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage.
The tag assigned to the bus time table is now valid, independent of the data
object.
Using the generic tag relation pimo:hasTag is an easy-to-use entry point for
users that don’t need formal semantic relations.
Using the property nao:hasTag is not sufﬁcient to be PIMO conformant, im-
plementers must use the pimo:hasTag relation for desktop tagging. The
nao:hasTag property and nao:Tag class are reserved for data of information
elements that are imported into a PIMO.
Example: The Belfast Bus Timetable has the topic Belfast, which is not just a
Tag but says more about the relation between the timetable and the city. The
has Tag relation can be used for this:
claudia:BelfastBusTimetable a pimo:Document;
pimo:hasTag claudia:Belfast.
Example: The relation between Claudia and the BelfastMeetingPackage can
be expressed using “has tag” but may also be represented with a relation saying
more about the semantics: Claudia is “attending this meeting”. Assuming that
the MeetingPackage is a sub-class of meeting, this could be expressed like:
claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage a meeting:MeetingPackage.
# instead of nao:hasTag, a semantic relation is used
claudia:Claudia pimo:attendee claudia:BelfastMeetingPackage.
11.8 Geo-locating Things
Things can be geo-located, meaning that their geographical location is set using
latitude, longitude and altitude information in the WGS84 geodetic reference
datum. In PIMO, the location is a separate entity of type Location, and other
items can then be geo-located there. The relation pimo:hasLocation is used
for this, pimo:isLocationOf is the inverse. There is an abstract marker class
for locatable Things: pimo:Locatable. Social events, organizations, persons,
and physical objects are locatable.
To add a location to a meeting, this data is added, for your reference the location
is also given:
claudia:InitialMeetinginBelfast a pimo:Meeting;
nao:prefLabel "Initial Meeting in Belfast";
pimo:hasLocation claudia:Belfast.
claudia:Belfast a pimo:City;
nao:prefLabel "Belfast";
geo:lat "54.5833333";
geo:long "-5.9333333".
Usually, locations should be reused to locate multiple Things, but new locations
can of course be generated anytime.
PIMO deﬁnes a number of general-purpose classes for countries, states, cities,
buildings, and rooms, which we consider independent of culture and domain.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 35

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Domain-speciﬁc ontologies can specify those classes further. In the rare case
when the type of location cannot be speciﬁed with any of the existing classes,
the superclass pimo:Location can be used. In some application scenarios
(such as geo-locating a large amount of photos or measurement values),
many locations would be needed. To simplify annotation and remove clutter,
specialized vocabularies may then be used, as for example done in the NEXIF
vocabulary for photos.
11.9 Deﬁning what is in the PIMO and what is not: NRL Graphs and definedBy
The facts (i.e., the statements) used to describe Things should be kept in
named graphs according to the NRL standard. This allows to express metadata
about the facts, such as to which PIMO the Things belong (see Sect. 6.3) or
when individual triples were changed (see Sect. 6.10) and by whom. Another
important feature is to ﬁnd which Things are in the user’s PIMO and which not.
In a shared environment, users may often import group-level ontologies that
contain Things modeled by others. Considering this, it is important to keep
up-to-date as to who said what, or, in other words, to detect if a Thing was
modeled by the user or not.
All data expressed about Things can be kept in NRL graphs. The minimal
metadata is:
• The type of the graph is nrl:KnowledgeBase, as it can contain both
instances and ontology constructs (see the NRL speciﬁcation for more
details).
• The graph is imported into the user’s PIMO.
Additional metadata such as nao:created can be added. These facts can be
expressed in a separate metadata graph. An example of how this looks like in
code using Trig Notation30:
# The instance data
claudia:graph1 {
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
nao:prefLabel 'Dirk Hagemann'.
}
# The metadata
claudia:graph1_metadata {
claudia:graph1 a nrl:KnowledgeBase;
claudia:PIMO nrl:imports claudia:graph1.
}
As not all implementers can or want to use NRL graphs to keep track
of the boundaries of a PIMO, pimo:isDefinedBy must be used to connect
classes, properties, and instances to the PIMO that deﬁnes them31.
To support both ways of detecting the boundaries of a user-PIMO, imple-
mentations may add the NRL metadata in addition to the pimo:isDefinedBy
statements to the generated data. Resulting in:
# The instance data
claudia:graph1 {
claudia:DirkHagemann a pimo:Person;
pimo:isDefinedBy claudia:PIMO.
30http://sites.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/suhl/bizer/TriG/
31Separation based on the namespace was considered by some to be enough, but is not (as
stores use fulltext comparison to handle namespaces, namespaces as such don’t exist in RDF but
only in XML).
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 36

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
nao:prefLabel 'Dirk Hagemann'.
}
# The metadata
claudia:graph1_metadata {
claudia:graph1 a nrl:KnowledgeBase;
claudia:PIMO nrl:imports claudia:graph1.
}
11.10 Using NAO and NIE Elements for Annotation
Throughout this document, we have shown several uses of NAO and NIE
elements that can be applied to pimo:Thing instances.
Semantically, we start from the assumption that a Thing modeled in PIMO is
describing a concept from the real world. On the other hand, the Thing itself
can be viewed as a set of statements or triples stored in a computer system.
Thus, Things are resources and can be annotated with NAO. Also, using PIMO
closure as described in Sect. 7.2, facts of NIE elements can be inferred as facts
of PIMO Things. Thus, Things can also have a NIE class as type.
In Table 1 we give an overview of how the semantics of the predicates may
alter when interpreted within the PIMO.
The text “no change” means that the interpretation is unchanged, “not inter-
preted” means you should avoid interpreting this property in PIMO. You may
notice that some properties are not interpreted because they have DataObjects
or Strings as range, where PIMO has properties modeling the same semantics
but using other pimo:Things as range, which is a more precise way of modeling
because of the UNA. “Required” means that this property is required for all
instances of pimo:Thing and this can be validated using the rules from Section
12.2. “Recommended” means that you should use this property as if it is
required, but it cannot be validated in NRL as property restrictions are only
available in OWL.
The properties describing how information is stored (mime-type, bytesize,
characterset) are obsolete for Things, as they describe a serialization.
11.11 How to Infer Knowledge Using Rules?
The presented ontology may be used to express facts that can be used to
infer new knowledge. For example, the person Claudia may be working on the
project “CID”. Claudia is also employed by the company Example Inc. — this
may be used to infer that the company Example is involved in “CID” Such rules
are very useful to improve the results when querying, as they will provide more
answers.
In PIMO and NRL, it is not straightforward how to express these rules. Also,
as PIMO-upper is generic, any rules deﬁned on this level may not apply in all
group-level ontologies.
We recommend to express such rules using a rule language (such as the ones
deﬁned by the RIF working group of W3C32) or SPARQL-create statements.
These should be part of domain and group ontologies.
32http://www.w3.org/2005/rules/
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 37

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Term Semantics
nao:created Recommended When the RDF Resource representing
this Thing was ﬁrst created in the user’s PIMO.
nao:identifier no change, used for identiﬁcation and matching.
nao:lastModified Recommended When the Resource representing this
Thing was last changed in the user’s PIMO. Note that it
can be different from the nie:contentLastModiﬁed prop-
erty of a groundingOccurrence. When blending multiple
groundingOccurrences into a Thing, the latest content-
LastModiﬁed should be chosen.
nao:modified Recommended
nao:personalIdentifier Not recommended, pimo:tagLabel must be used.
nao:prefLabel Recommended
nie:characterSet Not interpreted, obsolete in RDF
nie:comment no change
nie:contentCreated Not interpreted
nie:contentLastModified Not interpreted
nie:contentSize Not interpreted, obsolete in RDF
nie:copyright no change, can be set by the user when sharing Things
with others. See also nie:legal
nie:depends no change
nie:description no change
nie:disclaimer not interpreted
nie:generator no change, pimo:Things can be generated automati-
cally by software or manipulated by user interfaces
nie:generatorOption no change
nie:hasPart not interpreted, pimo:hasPart should be used
nie:identifier no change
nie:isStoredIn not interpreted, pimo:isDefinedBy covers the stor-
age.
nie:keyword not interpreted, should be modeled using hasTag and
assigning the keyword as title of the topic.
nie:language no change
nie:legal no change, by default all legal properties scope all
the statements having the same subject as the legal
statement
nie:license no change
nie:licenseType no change
nie:links not interpreted, use pimo:related or pimo:hasTag
nie:mimeType not interpreted, obsolete in RDF
nie:plainTextContent no change
nie:relatedTo not interpreted, use pimo:related
nie:subject not interpreted, use pimo:hasTag
nie:title not interpreted
nie:version no change
Table 1: Semantics of NAO and NIE in PIMO
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 38

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
12 Rules Deﬁned by PIMO
Some of the rules deﬁned in PIMO cannot be expressed using ordinary NRL se-
mantics. These rules are written here using SPARQL construct queries and are
also part of the ontology, by virtue of nrl:RuleViewSpecification. The
rules help to infer additional statements or validate a model. All rules in this
section assume that at least the sub-class and sub-property relations
are inferred.
12.1 Construction Rules
The ﬁrst set of rules deﬁne new information that is inferred from existing data.
They are used for integrating facts about Things by blending, see Sect. 7.2.
The rules are expressed based on the assumption that Tbox inferenced facts
are available in querying, whereas Abox inference may or may not. This means,
sub-class and sub-property relations are fully inferred, but the statements
implied by them may or may not33. For some of the rules, the semantics of
equality comparison is clearer under this assumption. For example, assume two
sub-properties of nao:identifier: book:number and person:number, both
with a range of integer and values starting with numbers from 0. Expressing a
rule as “two Things are equal when their nao:identifier is equal” could imply,
that a book is equal a person.
pimo:InferOccurrences Level: These are the rules to infer what resources
are occurrences of Things based on identiﬁers. You can use this approach
to integrate data from large stores. For example to see all appearances of
a document using the document’s NIE-identiﬁer, this query searches for the
pimo:occurrence relations.
CONSTRUCT {
?thing pimo:occurrence ?occurrence.
} WHERE {
?i rdfs:subPropertyOf nao:identifier.
?thing ?i ?value.
?occurrence ?i ?value.
}
pimo:GroundingClosure Level: This adds all facts from grounding occur-
rences and hasOtherRepresentation occurrences to Things.
CONSTRUCT {
?thing ?p ?o
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:groundingOccurrence ?x.
?x ?p ?o.
}
CONSTRUCT {
?s ?p ?thing
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:groundingOccurrence ?x.
?s ?p ?x.
}
CONSTRUCT {
?thing ?p ?o
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:hasOtherRepresentation ?x.
33In instance bases, rules rdfs7 and rdfs9 make the majority of inferred statements and for
storage optimization http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/#RDFSRules
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 39

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
?x ?p ?o.
}
CONSTRUCT {
?s ?p ?thing
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:hasOtherRepresentation ?x.
?s ?p ?x.
}
pimo:OccurrenceClosure Level: This adds all facts of all occurrences to
Things.
CONSTRUCT {
?thing ?p ?o
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:occurrence ?x.
?x ?p ?o.
}
CONSTRUCT {
?s ?p ?thing
} WHERE {
?thing pimo:occurrence ?x.
?s ?p ?x.
}
A broader Topic is also the Topic of a Thing. If a Thing X has the tag A
and topic A has a super topic B, then X has also the tag B. superTopic and
subTopic are transitive.
CONSTRUCT {?x pimo:hasTag ?B}
WHERE
{?x pimo:hasTag ?A.
?A pimo:superTopic ?B.}
Note that this is not true for the hasPart relation.
An alternative to the hasTag rules would have been to represent topics as
RDFS classes (instead of having them as instance of type pimo:Topic) and
using rdfs:subClassOf relations instead of broader/narrower. But this has a
nasty side-effect that for a topic like “Web” having a sub-topic “Semantic Web”,
the user would suddenly be able to create instances of “Semantic Web”, this
would be confusing.
12.2 Validation Rules
These rules validate a model. Some assumptions stated in the text can be
validated using these rules. As a model for validation, we have chosen to pick
a similar approach as the Jena validation engine, namely creating errors. The
classes error:Error and error:Message were introduced for this purpose
and not deﬁned any further, we assume Errors can have parameters that are
passed back as error:param1, error:param2, etc. The parameters can be
referenced in the error message for readability.
12.3 Rules Valid when Integrating with NIE
When using PIMO in coordination with NIE, certain properties from NIE can
be reused. The rules are often used to restrict properties deﬁned in the NIE
ontology to be mandatory on pimo:Things, whereas they are optional when
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 40

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
used on nie:InformationElement. Such restrictions are possible in OWL but
not in NRL.
Every Thing must have a nao:prefLabel.
CONSTRUCT {
_:err a error:Error.
_:err error:Message ``Thing \%1 does not have a nao:prefLabel''.
_:err error:param1 ?x.
} WHERE {
?x rdf:type pimo:Thing.
OPTIONAL { ?x nao:prefLabel ?title } .
FILTER (!bound(?title))
}
Every Thing must have nao:created.
CONSTRUCT {
_:err a error:Error.
_:err error:Message ``Thing \%1 does not have a nao:created''.
_:err error:param1 ?x.
} WHERE {
?x rdf:type pimo:Thing.
OPTIONAL { ?x nao:created ?created } .
FILTER (!bound(?created))
}
13 Sources considered for designing PIMO
Several ontologies and scientiﬁc publications predate this speciﬁcation. A
deﬁnition of the term PIMO was given in [18]: A PIMO is a Personal Information
Model of one person. It is a formal representation of parts of the users Mental
Model. Each concept in the Mental Model can be represented using a Thing
or a sub-class of this class in RDF. Native Resources found in the Personal
Knowledge Workspace can be categorized, then they are occurrences of a
Thing.
A similar approach was used by Huiyong Xiao and Isabel F. Cruz in their paper
on “A Multi-Ontology Approach for Personal Information Management”, where
they differentiate between Application Layer, Domain Layer and Resource
Layer. Alexakos et al. described “A Multilayer Ontology Scheme for Integrated
Searching in Distributed Hypermedia” in [4]. There, the layers consist of
an upper search ontology layer, domain description ontologies layer, and a
semantic metadata layer.
PIMO is different from Topic Maps (TM) in that it is based on the logical and
semantic foundations of RDF and RDFS, whereas TM have no such foundation.
A major difference between TM and RDF is that Topic Maps Associations are
n-ary relations, whereas in RDF relations are always binary. In RDF, a similar
approach as to TM is the SKOS vocabulary [8]. It represents all Things using
the class Concept, this prohibits reusing inference and typed properties of
concepts (e.g., the “ﬁrst name” property of a person cannot be modeled in
SKOS).
The idea of mapping SKOS, RDF, OWL and topic maps with upper ontologies
has come up repeatedly, but with varying outcome. We value these articles
as very important for our work, because of their excellent research and the
experience of the authors.
• Pepper and Schwab [15] try to map the identiﬁcation approach of XML
Topic Maps to RDF, leaving a few issues open.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 41

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
• Jack Park and Adam Cheyer mapped Topic Maps to Semantic Desktops
for Personal Information Management in [14].
• The Semex system provides ideas about reference reconciliation [7]
• Jerome Euzenat proposed a top-level ontology for PIM in light of FOAF34
Although this is a small, seemingly unimportant footnote, it shows how
often capable people tried to address this problem.
• User Proﬁle Ontology version 1[9], mentioned in [5]35.
• Latif and Tjoa [12] map a user ontology against other top-level ontologies
such as SUMO and DOLCE and use the LATCH approach from Richard
Saul Wurman.
A Changes
This Section lists changes from different version.
A.1 From v1.0 to 1.1
General:
• Two new Sections: tagging 6.17 and topic hierarchies 6.18.
• pimo:tagLabel must be used instead of nao:personalIdentifier.
• Added pimo:hasRootTopic to link to root topics.
• Added pimo:hasGlobalNamespace to express the global namespace as
written in the semdesk URI draft.
• Added pimo:hasLocalNamespace to express the local namespace as
written in the semdesk URI draft.
• The range of rating has changed to [0..10].
Introducing pimo:Tag to unify the problematic parallel worlds of nao:Tag and
pimo:Thing. pimo:Tag is the class to use for tags.
• pimo:Tag is an adaption of nao:Tag for PIMO with precise semantics.
• pimo:Topic is a sublcass of pimo:Tag.
• pimo:Tag is a subclass of pimo:Thing.
• pimo:hasTopic is renamed to pimo:hasTag and the range is Tag
• pimo:isTopicOf is renamed to pimo:isTagFor and the domain is Tag
• pimo:tagLabelisintroducedasasubpropertyofnao:personalIdentifier,
domain pimo:Tag and with mincardinality 1 and maxcardinality 1.
34http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Europe/200210/calendar/SyncLink.html
35http://oceanis.mm.di.uoa.gr/pened/?category=publications
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 42

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
References
[1] ISO/IEC 13250, Topic Maps, second edition. http://www.y12.doe.gov/
sgml/sc34/document/0322_files/iso13250-2nd-ed-v2.pdf, 19 May
2002.
[2] Ben Adida and Mark Birbeck. Rdfa prime. bridging the human and data
webs. W3C Working Group Note http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-rdfa-primer/,
W3C, http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-rdfa-primer/, 14 October 2008.
[3] D. Brickley and R.V. Guha. RDF vocabulary description language 1.0: RDF
schema. W3C recommendation. http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/,
10 February 2004.
[4] K. Votis C. Alexakos, B. Vassiliadis and S. Likothanassis. A Multilayer
Ontology Scheme for Integrated Searching in Distributed Hypermedia,
volume Adaptive and Personalized Semantic Web of Studies in Computa-
tional Intelligence. Springer, 2006.
[5] T. Catarci, A. Dix, A. Katifori, G. Lepouras, and A. Poggi. Task-centered
information management. In C. Thanos and F. Borri, editors, DELOS
Conference 2007 on Working Notes, pages 253–263, Tirrenia, Pisa, 13-14
February 2007.
[6] Andreas R. Dengel. Six thousand words about multi-perspective personal
document management. In Proc. EDM IEEE Workshop. IEEE, Oct 2006.
[7] Xin Dong and Alon Y. Halevy. A platform for personal information manage-
ment and integration. In Proc. of the CIDR Conference, pages 119–130,
2005.
[8] Alistair Miles (edt). Simple knowledge organisation system (skos). http:
//www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/, Feb 2004.
[9] M. Golemati, A. Katifori, C. Vassilakis, G. Lepouras, and C. Halatsis.
User proﬁle ontology version 1. http://oceanis.mm.di.uoa.gr/pened/
?category=publications, 2006.
[10] Harald Holz, Heiko Maus, Ansgar Bernardi, and Oleg Rostanin. From
Lightweight, Proactive Information Delivery to Business Process-Oriented
Knowledge Management. volume 0, pages 101–127, 2005.
[11] William Jones and Jamie Teevan, editors. Personal Information Manage-
ment. University of Washington Press, October 2007.
[12] Khalid Latif and A Min Tjoa. Combining context ontology and landmarks for
personal information management. In Proceedings of International Con-
ference on Computing and Informatics (ICOCI), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
June 2006.
[13] Alistair Miles, Thomas Baker, and Ralph Swick. Best practice recipes
for publishing RDF vocabularies. W3C working draft, W3C, Mar 2006.
http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-vocab-pub/.
[14] Jack Park and Adam Cheyer. Just for me: Topic maps and ontologies.
In Lutz Maicher and Jack Park, editors, TMRA Charting the Topic Maps
Research and Applications Landscape, First International Workshop on
Topic Maps Research and Applications, volume 3873 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 145–159. Springer, 2005.
[15] Steve Pepper and Sylvia Schwab. Curing the web’s identity crisis. subject
indicators for rdf. Technical report, Ontopia, 2003.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 43

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
[16] Holger Rath. The topic maps handbook — detailed description of the
standard and practical guidelines for using it in knowledge management.
empolis white paper, empolis GmbH, 2003.
[17] Jean Rohmer. Lessons for the future of semantic desktops learnt from 10
years of experience with the ideliance semantic networks manager. In Ste-
fan Decker, Jack Park, Dennis Quan, and Leo Sauermann, editors, Proc.
of Semantic Desktop Workshop at the ISWC, Galway, Ireland, November
6, volume 175, November 2005.
[18] Leo Sauermann, Ludger van Elst, and Andreas Dengel. Pimo - a frame-
work for representing personal information models. In Tassilo Pellegrini
and Sebastian Schaffert, editors, Proceedings of I-Semantics’ 07, pages
pp. 270–277. JUCS, 2007.
[19] Graham Moore (eds). Steve Pepper. XML Topic Maps (XTM) 1.0. Speciﬁ-
cation, TopicMaps.Org, 2001.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 44

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B PIMO Speciﬁcation
B.1 Ontology Classes Description
B.1.1 Agent
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Organization B.1.20 p. 52
pimo:Person B.1.22 p. 53
pimo:PersonGroup B.1.23 p. 53
In domain of: pimo:createdPimo B.2.9 p. 60
pimo:isOrganizationMemberOf B.2.28 p. 66
In range of: pimo:creator B.2.10 p. 60
pimo:hasOrganizationMember B.2.20 p. 63
Description An agent (eg. person, group, software or physical
artifact). The Agent class is the class of agents;
things that do stuff. A well known sub-class is Per-
son, representing people. Other kinds of agents
include Organization and Group. (inspired by
FOAF). Agent is not a subclass of NAO:Party.
B.1.2 Association
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
Subclasses pimo:Attendee B.1.3 p. 45
pimo:OrganizationMember B.1.21 p. 53
pimo:PersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
In domain of: pimo:associationEffectual B.2.1 p. 58
pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
In range of: –
Description An association between two or more pimo-things.
This is used to model n-ary relations and meta-
data about relations. For example, the asociation
of a person being organizational member is only
effectual within a period of time (after the person
joined the organization and before the person left
the organization). There can be multiple periods
of time when associations are valid.
B.1.3 Attendee
Superclasses pimo:Association B.1.2 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:PersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
rdfs:Resource
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 45

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:attendingMeeting B.2.4 p. 59
In range of: –
Description The role of someone attending a social event.
B.1.4 BlogPost
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A blog note. You just want to write something
down right now and need a place to do that. Add
a blog-note! This is an example class for a docu-
ment type, there are more detailled ontologies to
model Blog-Posts (like SIOC).
B.1.5 Building
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A structure that has a roof and walls and stands
more or less permanently in one place; "there
was a three-story building on the corner"; "it was
an imposing ediﬁce". (Deﬁnition from SUMO).
B.1.6 City
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 46

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A large and densely populated urban area; may
include several independent administrative dis-
tricts; "Ancient Troy was a great city". (Deﬁnition
from SUMO)
B.1.7 ClassOrThing
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
Subclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:BlogPost B.1.4 p. 46
pimo:Building B.1.5 p. 46
pimo:City B.1.6 p. 46
pimo:Collection B.1.10 p. 48
pimo:Contract B.1.11 p. 49
pimo:Country B.1.12 p. 49
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:Note B.1.19 p. 52
pimo:Organization B.1.20 p. 52
pimo:Person B.1.22 p. 53
pimo:PersonGroup B.1.23 p. 53
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
pimo:Project B.1.27 p. 55
pimo:Room B.1.28 p. 55
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
pimo:State B.1.30 p. 56
pimo:Task B.1.31 p. 56
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
pimo:Topic B.1.33 p. 58
In domain of: pimo:hasFolder B.2.18 p. 63
pimo:wikiText B.2.45 p. 70
In range of: –
Description Superclass of class and thing. To add properties
to both class and thing.
B.1.8 ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
Superclasses rdfs:Resource
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 47

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Subclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:Association B.1.2 p. 45
pimo:Attendee B.1.3 p. 45
pimo:BlogPost B.1.4 p. 46
pimo:Building B.1.5 p. 46
pimo:City B.1.6 p. 46
pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:Collection B.1.10 p. 48
pimo:Contract B.1.11 p. 49
pimo:Country B.1.12 p. 49
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:Note B.1.19 p. 52
pimo:Organization B.1.20 p. 52
pimo:OrganizationMember B.1.21 p. 53
pimo:Person B.1.22 p. 53
pimo:PersonGroup B.1.23 p. 53
pimo:PersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
pimo:Project B.1.27 p. 55
pimo:Room B.1.28 p. 55
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
pimo:State B.1.30 p. 56
pimo:Task B.1.31 p. 56
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
pimo:Topic B.1.33 p. 58
In domain of: pimo:isDeﬁnedBy B.2.26 p. 65
In range of: –
Description Superclass of resources that can be generated
by the user.
B.1.9 ClassRole
Superclasses rdfs:Resource
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: pimo:classRole B.2.7 p. 60
Description Roles of classes in PIMO: concrete instances are
Abstract and Concrete.
Instances pimo:AbstractClass
pimo:ConcreteClass
B.1.10 Collection
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 48

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Subclasses pimo:PersonGroup B.1.23 p. 53
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A collection of Things, independent of their class.
The items in the collection share a common prop-
erty. Which property may be modelled explicitly
or mentioned in the description of the Collection.
The requirement of explicit modelling the seman-
tic meaning of the collection is not mandatory,
as collections can be created ad-hoc. Implizit
modelling can be applied by the system by learn-
ing the properties. For example, a Collection
of "Coworkers" could be deﬁned as that all ele-
ments must be of class "Person" and have an
attribute "work for the same Organization as the
user". Further standards can be used to model
these attributes.
B.1.11 Contract
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A binding agreement between two or more per-
sons that is enforceable by law. (Deﬁnition from
SUMO). This is an example class for a document
type, there are more detailled ontologies to model
Contracts.
B.1.12 Country
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description Theterritoryoccupiedbyanation; "hereturnedto
thelandofhisbirth"; "hevisitedseveralEuropean
countries". (Deﬁnition from SUMO)
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 49

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.1.13 Document
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:BlogPost B.1.4 p. 46
pimo:Contract B.1.11 p. 49
pimo:Note B.1.19 p. 52
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A generic document. This is a placeholder class
for document-management domain ontologies to
subclass. Create more and speciﬁed subclasses
of pimo:Document for the document types in your
domain. Documents are typically instances of
both NFO:Document (modeling the information
element used to store the document) and a Logi-
calMediaType subclass. Two examples are given
for what to model here: a contract for a business
domain, a BlogPost for an informal domain.
B.1.14 Event
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description Something that happens An Event is conceived
as compact in time. (Deﬁnition from Merriam-
Webster)
B.1.15 Locatable
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:Organization B.1.20 p. 52
pimo:Person B.1.22 p. 53
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
In domain of: pimo:hasLocation B.2.19 p. 63
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 50

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
In range of: –
Description Things that can be at a location. Abstract class,
use it as a superclass of things that can be placed
in physical space.
B.1.16 Location
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Building B.1.5 p. 46
pimo:City B.1.6 p. 46
pimo:Country B.1.12 p. 49
pimo:Room B.1.28 p. 55
pimo:State B.1.30 p. 56
In domain of: pimo:containsLocation B.2.8 p. 60
pimo:isLocationOf B.2.27 p. 65
pimo:locatedWithin B.2.33 p. 67
In range of: pimo:containsLocation B.2.8 p. 60
pimo:hasLocation B.2.19 p. 63
pimo:locatedWithin B.2.33 p. 67
Description A physical location. Subclasses are modeled
for the most common locations humans work in:
Building, City, Country, Room, State. This selec-
tion is intended to be applicable cross-cultural
and cross-domain. City is a prototype that can
be further reﬁned for villages, etc. Subclass of a
WGS84:SpatialThing, can have geo-coordinates.
B.1.17 LogicalMediaType
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:BlogPost B.1.4 p. 46
pimo:Contract B.1.11 p. 49
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:Note B.1.19 p. 52
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 51

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Description Logical media types represent the content aspect
of information elements e.g. a ﬂyer, a contract, a
promotional video, a todo list. The user can cre-
ate new logical media types dependend on their
domain: a salesman will need MarketingFlyer,
Offer, Invoice while a student might create Re-
port, Thesis and Homework. This is independent
from the information element and data object
(NIE/NFO) in which the media type will be stored.
The same contract can be stored in a PDF ﬁle, a
text ﬁle, or an HTML website. The groundingOc-
currence of a LogicalMediaType is the Document
that stores the content.
B.1.18 Meeting
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
rdfs:Resource
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description The social act of assembling for some common
purpose; "his meeting with the salesman was the
high point of his day". (Deﬁnition from SUMO)
B.1.19 Note
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A note. The textual contents of the note should
be expressed in the nao:description value of the
note.
B.1.20 Organization
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 52

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Superclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:hasOrganizationMember B.2.20 p. 63
In range of: pimo:isOrganizationMemberOf B.2.28 p. 66
pimo:organization B.2.37 p. 68
Description An administrative and functional structure (as a
business or a political party). (Deﬁnition from
Merriam-Webster)
B.1.21 OrganizationMember
Superclasses pimo:Association B.1.2 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:PersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
rdfs:Resource
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:organization B.2.37 p. 68
In range of: –
Description The role of one or multiple persons being a
member in one or multiple organizations. Use
pimo:organization and pimo:roleHolder to link to
the organizations and persons.
B.1.22 Person
Superclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:attends B.2.5 p. 59
pimo:jabberId B.2.32 p. 67
In range of: pimo:attendee B.2.3 p. 59
pimo:roleHolder B.2.41 p. 69
Description Represents a person. Either living, dead, real or
imaginary. (Deﬁnition from foaf:Person)
B.1.23 PersonGroup
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 53

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Superclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Collection B.1.10 p. 48
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description A group of Persons. They are connected to each
other by sharing a common attribute, for example
they all belong to the same organization or have
a common interest. Refer to pimo:Collection for
more information about deﬁning collections.
B.1.24 PersonRole
Superclasses pimo:Association B.1.2 p. 45
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
Subclasses pimo:Attendee B.1.3 p. 45
pimo:OrganizationMember B.1.21 p. 53
In domain of: pimo:roleContext B.2.40 p. 69
pimo:roleHolder B.2.41 p. 69
In range of: –
Description A person takes a certain role in a given context.
The role can be that of "a mentor or another
person" or "giving a talk at a meeting", etc.
B.1.25 PersonalInformationModel
Superclasses nrl:Data
nrl:Graph
nrl:InstanceBase
nrl:KnowledgeBase
nrl:Ontology
rdfs:Resource
nrl:Schema
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:creator B.2.10 p. 60
In range of: pimo:createdPimo B.2.9 p. 60
pimo:isDeﬁnedBy B.2.26 p. 65
Description A Personal Information Model (PIMO) of a user.
Represents the sum of all information from the
personal knowledge workspace (in literature also
referred to as Personal Space of Information
(PSI)) which a user needs for Personal Informa-
tion Management (PIM).
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 54

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.1.26 ProcessConcept
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:Project B.1.27 p. 55
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
pimo:Task B.1.31 p. 56
In domain of: pimo:dtend B.2.12 p. 61
pimo:dtstart B.2.13 p. 61
In range of: –
Description Concepts that relate to a series of actions or
operations conducing to an end. Abstract class.
Deﬁnes optional start and endtime properties,
names taken from NCAL.
B.1.27 Project
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description Any piece of work that is undertaken or attempted
(Wordnet). An enterprise carefully planned to
achieve a particular aim (Oxford Dictionary).
B.1.28 Room
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 55

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Description A properPart of a Building which is separated
from the exterior of the Building and/or other
Rooms of the Building by walls. Some Rooms
may have a speciﬁc purpose, e.g. sleeping,
bathing, cooking, entertainment, etc. (Deﬁnition
from SUMO).
B.1.29 SocialEvent
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
In domain of: pimo:attendee B.2.3 p. 59
pimo:duration B.2.14 p. 61
In range of: pimo:attendingMeeting B.2.4 p. 59
pimo:attends B.2.5 p. 59
Description A social occasion or activity. (Deﬁnition from
Merriam-Webster)
B.1.30 State
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
rdfs:Resource
geo:SpatialThing
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: –
In range of: –
Description Administrative subdivisions of a Nation that are
broader than any other political subdivisions that
may exist. This Class includes the states of
the United States, as well as the provinces of
Canada and European countries. (Deﬁnition from
SUMO).
B.1.31 Task
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 56

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:taskDueTime B.2.44 p. 70
In range of: –
Description A (usually assigned) piece of work (often to be
ﬁnished within a certain time). (Deﬁnition from
Merriam-Webster)
B.1.32 Thing
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
Subclasses pimo:Agent B.1.1 p. 45
pimo:BlogPost B.1.4 p. 46
pimo:Building B.1.5 p. 46
pimo:City B.1.6 p. 46
pimo:Collection B.1.10 p. 48
pimo:Contract B.1.11 p. 49
pimo:Country B.1.12 p. 49
pimo:Document B.1.13 p. 50
pimo:Event B.1.14 p. 50
pimo:Locatable B.1.15 p. 50
pimo:Location B.1.16 p. 51
pimo:LogicalMediaType B.1.17 p. 51
pimo:Meeting B.1.18 p. 52
pimo:Note B.1.19 p. 52
pimo:Organization B.1.20 p. 52
pimo:Person B.1.22 p. 53
pimo:PersonGroup B.1.23 p. 53
pimo:ProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
pimo:Project B.1.27 p. 55
pimo:Room B.1.28 p. 55
pimo:SocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
pimo:State B.1.30 p. 56
pimo:Task B.1.31 p. 56
pimo:Topic B.1.33 p. 58
In domain of: pimo:datatypeProperty B.2.11 p. 61
pimo:groundingOccurrence B.2.16 p. 62
pimo:hasDeprecatedRepresentation B.2.17 p. 62
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation B.2.22 p. 64
pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:hasTopic B.2.25 p. 65
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:isTopicOf B.2.30 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
pimo:occurrence B.2.36 p. 68
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
pimo:referencingOccurrence B.2.39 p. 69
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 57

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
In range of: pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:hasTopic B.2.25 p. 65
pimo:isLocationOf B.2.27 p. 65
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:isTopicOf B.2.30 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
pimo:roleContext B.2.40 p. 69
Description Entities that are in the direct attention of the user
when doing knowledge work.
B.1.33 Topic
Superclasses pimo:ClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
pimo:ClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
rdfs:Resource
pimo:Thing B.1.32 p. 57
Subclasses –
In domain of: pimo:subTopic B.2.42 p. 69
pimo:superTopic B.2.43 p. 70
In range of: pimo:subTopic B.2.42 p. 69
pimo:superTopic B.2.43 p. 70
Description A topic is the subject of a discussion or docu-
ment. Topics are distinguished from Things in
their taxonomic nature, examples are scientiﬁc
areas such as "Information Science", "Biology",
or categories used in content syndication such
as "Sports", "Politics". They are speciﬁc to the
user’s domain.
B.2 Ontology Properties Description
B.2.1 associationEffectual
Domain pimoAssociation B.1.2 p. 45
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description During which time is this association effective? If
omitted, the association is always effective. Start
time and end-time may be left open, an open
start time indicates that the fact is unknown, an
open end-time indicates that the end-date is ei-
ther unknown or the association has not ended.
There can be multiple effectual periods.
B.2.2 associationMember
Domain pimoAssociation B.1.2 p. 45
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 58

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties –
Subproperties pimo:attendingMeeting B.2.4 p. 59
pimo:organization B.2.37 p. 68
pimo:roleContext B.2.40 p. 69
pimo:roleHolder B.2.41 p. 69
Description An super-property of all roles that an entity can
have in an association. Member is the generic
role of a thing in an association. Association
subclasses should deﬁne sub-properties of this
property. Associations can have Things as
B.2.3 attendee
Domain pimoSocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
Range pimoPerson B.1.22 p. 53
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description A social event is attended by a person.
B.2.4 attendingMeeting
Domain pimoAttendee B.1.3 p. 45
Range pimoSocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
Superproperties pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
pimo:roleContext B.2.40 p. 69
Subproperties –
Description the attended meeting
B.2.5 attends
Domain pimoPerson B.1.22 p. 53
Range pimoSocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description A person attends a social event.
B.2.6 broader
Domain
Range
Superproperties –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 59

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Subproperties –
Description
B.2.7 classRole
Domain
Range pimoClassRole B.1.9 p. 48
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description Annotating abstract and concrete classes. Im-
plementations may offer the feature to hide ab-
stract classes. By default, classes are concrete.
Classes can be declared abstract by setting their
classRole to abstract. Instances should not have
an abstract class as type (if not inferred).
B.2.8 containsLocation
Domain pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Range pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Superproperties pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The subject location contains the object location.
For example, a building contains a room or a
country contains a city.
B.2.9 createdPimo
Domain pimoAgent B.1.1 p. 45
Range pimoPersonalInformationModel B.1.25 p. 54
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description The creator of the Personal Information Model.
The human being whose mental models are rep-
resented in the PIMO.
B.2.10 creator
Domain pimoPersonalInformationModel B.1.25 p. 54
Range pimoAgent B.1.1 p. 45
Superproperties nao:annotation
x:creator
nao:creator
Subproperties –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 60

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Description The creator of the Personal Information Model.
A subproperty of NAO:creator. The human be-
ing whose mental models are represented in the
PIMO. Range is an Agent.
B.2.11 datatypeProperty
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range
Superproperties –
Subproperties geo:alt
pimo:dtend B.2.12 p. 61
pimo:dtstart B.2.13 p. 61
pimo:duration B.2.14 p. 61
geo:lat
geo:long
pimo:taskDueTime B.2.44 p. 70
Description The object of statements is a literal, resource,
or datatype value describing the subject thing.
Users should be able to edit statements deﬁned
with this property. Abstract super-property.
B.2.12 dtend
Domain pimoProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
Range xsddateTime
Superproperties pimo:datatypeProperty B.2.11 p. 61
Subproperties –
Description This property speciﬁes the date and time when a
process ends. Inspired by NCAL:dtend.
B.2.13 dtstart
Domain pimoProcessConcept B.1.26 p. 55
Range xsddateTime
Superproperties pimo:datatypeProperty B.2.11 p. 61
Subproperties –
Description This property speciﬁes when the process begins.
Inspired by NCAL:dtstart.
B.2.14 duration
Domain pimoSocialEvent B.1.29 p. 56
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties pimo:datatypeProperty B.2.11 p. 61
Subproperties –
Description The duration of the meeting. Begin and end time.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 61

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.2.15 groundingForDeletedThing
Domain
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description This NIE Information Element was used as a
grounding occurrence for the object Thing. The
Thing was then deleted by the user manually, in-
dicating that this Information Element should not
cause an automatic creation of another Thing in
the future. The object resource has no range
to indicate that it was completely removed from
the user’s PIMO, including the rdf:type statement.
Relevant for data alignment and enrichment algo-
rithms.
B.2.16 groundingOccurrence
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range nieInformationElement ?? p. ??
Superproperties pimo:occurrence B.2.36 p. 68
Subproperties –
Description The subject Thing represents the entity that is
described in the object InformationElement. The
subject Thing is the canonical, unique represen-
tation in the personal information model for the
entity described in the object. Multiple Informa-
tionElements can be the grounding occurrence
of the same Thing, one InformationElement can
be the groundingOccurrence of only one Thing.
B.2.17 hasDeprecatedRepresentation
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description The subject Thing was represented previously
using the object resource. This indicates that the
object resource was a duplicate representation
of the subject and merged with the subject. Im-
plementations can use this property to resolve
dangling links in distributed system. When en-
countering resources that are deprecated repre-
sentations of a Thing, they should be replaced
with the Thing. The range is not declared as we
assume all knowledge about the object is gone,
including its rdf:type.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 62

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.2.18 hasFolder
Domain pimoClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
Range nfoFolder ?? p. ??
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description Folders can be used to store information ele-
ments related to a Thing or Class. This prop-
erty can be used to connect a Class or Thing to
existing Folders. Implementations can suggest
annotations for documents stored inside these
folders or suggest the folder for new documents
related to the Thing or Class.
B.2.19 hasLocation
Domain pimoLocatable B.1.15 p. 50
Range pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The subject thing is currently located at the object
location.
B.2.20 hasOrganizationMember
Domain pimoOrganization B.1.20 p. 52
Range pimoAgent B.1.1 p. 45
Superproperties pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The subject organization has the object person
or organization (Agent) as a member.
B.2.21 hasOtherConceptualization
Domain rdfsClass
Range rdfsClass
Superproperties pimo:occurrence B.2.36 p. 68
rdfs:subClassOf
Subproperties –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 63

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Description Short: hasOtherRepresentation points from a
Class in your PIMO to a class in a domain on-
tology that represents the same class. Longer:
hasOtherConceptualization means that a class of
real world objects O represented by a concept C1
in the ontology has additional conceptualizations
(as classes C2-Cn in different domain ontologies).
This means: IF (O_i is conceptialized by C_j in
Ontology_k) AND (O_l is conceptialized by C_m
in Ontology_n) THEN (O_i and O_l is the same
set of objects). hasOtherConceptualization is an
transitive relation, but not equivalent (not sym-
metric nor reﬂexive).
B.2.22 hasOtherRepresentation
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties pimo:occurrence B.2.36 p. 68
Subproperties –
Description hasOtherRepresentation points from a Thing in
your PIMO to a thing in an ontology that repre-
sents the same real world thing. This means
that the real world object O represented by an
instance I1 has additional representations (as
instances I2-In of different conceptualizations).
This means: IF (I_i represents O_j in Ontology_k)
AND (I_m represents O_n in Ontology_o) THEN
(O_n and O_j are the same object). hasOther-
Representation is a transitive relation, but not
equivalent (not symmetric nor reﬂexive).
For example, the URI of a foaf:Person represen-
tation published on the web is a hasOtherRepre-
sentation for the person. This property is inverse
functional, two Things from two information mod-
els having the same hasOtherRepresentation are
considered to be representations of the same en-
tity from the real world.
TODO: rename this to subjectIndicatorRef to re-
semble topic maps ideas?
B.2.23 hasOtherSlot
Domain rdfProperty
Range rdfProperty
Superproperties rdfs:subPropertyOf
Subproperties –
Description hasOtherSlot points from a clot in your PIMO to
a slot in a domain ontology that represents the
same connection idea.
B.2.24 hasPart
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 64

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties pimo:containsLocation B.2.8 p. 60
pimo:hasOrganizationMember B.2.20 p. 63
pimo:subTopic B.2.42 p. 69
Description The object is part of the subject. Like a page is
part of a book or an engine is part of a car. You
can make sub-properties of this to reﬂect more
detailed relations.
B.2.25 hasTopic
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:hasTopic
nao:isRelated
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The subject’s contents describes the object. Or
the subject can be seen as belonging to the topic
described by the object. Similar semantics as
skos:subject.
B.2.26 isDeﬁnedBy
Domain pimoClassOrThingOrPropertyOrAssociation
B.1.8 p. 47
Range pimoPersonalInformationModel B.1.25 p. 54
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description Each element in a PIMO must be connected to
the PIMO, to be able to track multiple PIMOs in a
distributed scenario. Also, this is the way to ﬁnd
the user that this Thing belongs to.
B.2.27 isLocationOf
Domain pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The subject location is the current location of the
object.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 65

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.2.28 isOrganizationMemberOf
Domain pimoAgent B.1.1 p. 45
Range pimoOrganization B.1.20 p. 52
Superproperties pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
Subproperties –
Description The subject person or organozation (Agent) is
member of the object organization.
B.2.29 isRelated
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties pimo:attendee B.2.3 p. 59
pimo:attends B.2.5 p. 59
pimo:hasLocation B.2.19 p. 63
pimo:isLocationOf B.2.27 p. 65
Description The thing is related to the other thing. Similar
in meaning to skos:related. Symmetric but not
transitive.
B.2.30 isTopicOf
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties nao:annotation
nao:isRelated
nao:isTopicOf
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description This thing is described further in the object thing.
Similar semantics as skos:isSubjectOf.
B.2.31 isWriteable
Domain
Range rdfsLiteral
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description Deﬁnes if this information model can be modiﬁed
by the user of the system. This is usually false for
imported ontologies and true for the user’s own
PersonalInformationModel.
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 66

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
B.2.32 jabberId
Domain pimoPerson B.1.22 p. 53
Range rdfsLiteral
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description Jabber-ID of the user. Used to communi-
cate amongst peers in the social scenario
of the semantic desktop. Use the xmpp
node identiﬁer as speciﬁed by RFC3920, see
http://www.xmpp.org/specs/rfc3920.html#addressing-
node. The format is the same as e-mail
addresses: username@hostname.
B.2.33 locatedWithin
Domain pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Range pimoLocation B.1.16 p. 51
Superproperties pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
Subproperties –
Description The subject location is contained within the object
location. For example, a room is located within a
building or a city is located within a country.
B.2.34 narrower
Domain
Range
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description
B.2.35 objectProperty
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties –
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 67

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Subproperties pimo:attendee B.2.3 p. 59
pimo:attends B.2.5 p. 59
pimo:containsLocation B.2.8 p. 60
pimo:hasLocation B.2.19 p. 63
pimo:hasOrganizationMember B.2.20 p. 63
pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:hasTopic B.2.25 p. 65
pimo:isLocationOf B.2.27 p. 65
pimo:isOrganizationMemberOf B.2.28 p. 66
pimo:isRelated B.2.29 p. 66
pimo:isTopicOf B.2.30 p. 66
pimo:locatedWithin B.2.33 p. 67
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
pimo:subTopic B.2.42 p. 69
pimo:superTopic B.2.43 p. 70
Description The object of statements is another Thing. Users
should be able to edit statements deﬁned with
this property. Abstract super-property.
B.2.36 occurrence
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range rdfsResource
Superproperties –
Subproperties pimo:groundingOccurrence B.2.16 p. 62
pimo:hasOtherConceptualization B.2.21 p. 63
pimo:hasOtherRepresentation B.2.22 p. 64
Description The subject Thing is represented also in the ob-
ject resource. All facts added to the object re-
source are valid for the subject thing. The subject
is the canonical represtation of the object. In par-
ticual, this implies when (?object ?p ?v) -> (?sub-
ject ?p ?v) and (?s ?p ?object) -> (?s ?p ?subject).
The class of the object is not deﬁned, but should
be compatible with the class of the subject. Oc-
currence relations can be inferred through same
identiﬁers or referencingOccurrence relations.
B.2.37 organization
Domain pimoOrganizationMember B.1.21 p. 53
Range pimoOrganization B.1.20 p. 52
Superproperties pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
Subproperties –
Description relation to the organization in an Organization-
Member association.
B.2.38 partOf
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 68

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Superproperties pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties pimo:isOrganizationMemberOf B.2.28 p. 66
pimo:locatedWithin B.2.33 p. 67
pimo:superTopic B.2.43 p. 70
Description This is part of the object. Like a page is part
of a book or an engine is part of a car. You
can make sub-properties of this to reﬂect more
detailed relations.
B.2.39 referencingOccurrence
Domain pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Range nieInformationElement ?? p. ??
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description The subject thing is described in the object doc-
ument. Ideally, the document is public and its
primary topic is the thing. Although this prop-
erty is not inverse-functional (because the Occur-
rences are not canonical elements of a formal
ontology) this property allows to use public doc-
uments, such as wikipedia pages, as indicators
identity. The more formal hasOtherRepresen-
tation property can be used when an ontology
about the subject exists.
B.2.40 roleContext
Domain pimoPersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
Range pimoThing B.1.32 p. 57
Superproperties pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
Subproperties pimo:attendingMeeting B.2.4 p. 59
Description The context where the role-holder impersonates
this role. For example, the company where a
person is employed.
B.2.41 roleHolder
Domain pimoPersonRole B.1.24 p. 54
Range pimoPerson B.1.22 p. 53
Superproperties pimo:associationMember B.2.2 p. 58
Subproperties –
Description the person taking the role
B.2.42 subTopic
Domain pimoTopic B.1.33 p. 58
Range pimoTopic B.1.33 p. 58
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 69

NEPOMUK 02.09.2008
Superproperties pimo:hasPart B.2.24 p. 64
pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
Subproperties –
Description The object topic is more speciﬁc in meaning than
the subject topic. Transitive. Similar in meaning
to skos:narrower
B.2.43 superTopic
Domain pimoTopic B.1.33 p. 58
Range pimoTopic B.1.33 p. 58
Superproperties pimo:objectProperty B.2.35 p. 67
pimo:partOf B.2.38 p. 68
Subproperties –
Description The object topic is more general in meaning
than the subject topic. Transitive. Similar to
skos:broader.
B.2.44 taskDueTime
Domain pimoTask B.1.31 p. 56
Range xsddateTime
Superproperties pimo:datatypeProperty B.2.11 p. 61
Subproperties –
Description when is this task due? Represented in ISO 8601,
example: 2003-11-22T17:00:00
B.2.45 wikiText
Domain pimoClassOrThing B.1.7 p. 47
Range rdfsLiteral
Superproperties –
Subproperties –
Description A wiki-like free-text description of a Thing or
a Class. The text can be formatted using
a limited set of HTML elements and can
contain links to other Things. The format
is described in detail in the WIF speciﬁcation
(http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Wiki_Interchange_Format).
Task Force Ontologies Version 1.0 70