Addressing Issues in Foundational Ontology Mediation
Zubeida Casmod Khan and C. Maria Keet
School of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, and UKZN/CSIR-Meraka Centre
for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, Durban, South Africa
zkhan@csir.co.za, keet@ukzn.ac.za
Keywords: Foundational Ontology; Ontology Mediation; Semantic Interoperability; Ontology Alignment; Ontology
Mapping; Ontology Matching; Ontology Merging.
Abstract: An approach in achieving semantic interoperability among heterogeneous systems is to offer infrastructure to
assist with linking and integration using a foundational ontology. Due to the creation of multiple foundational
ontologies, this also means linking and integrating those ones. In order to achieve this, we have selected
the widely used foundational ontologies DOLCE, BFO, and GFO, and their related modules, on which to
perform ontology mediation (alignment, mapping, and merging). The foundational ontologies were aligned
by identifying correspondences between ontology entities using seven tools, documentation, and our manual
alignments, and comparing their effectiveness. Thereafter, based on the alignments, we created correspon-
dencesin theontologyﬁlesresultingin entitymappingsand merged ontologies. However, duringthe mapping
process, it was found that differences in foundational ontologies, such as their hierarchical structure, conﬂict-
ing axioms due to complement and disjointness, and incompatible domain and range restriction, cause logical
inconsistencies in foundational ontology alignments, thereby greatly reducing the number of mappings. We
analyse and present these logical inconsistencies with possible solutions to some of them.
1 INTRODUCTION
There has been an exponential growth in ontology de-
velopment for the Semantic Web, including a move
toward modular and networked ontologies. Founda-
tional ontologies are commonly used to facilitate se-
mantic interoperability. However, Semantic Web sys-
tem developers use their ontologies with a preferred
foundational ontology. The semantics and underlying
Ontology of each foundational ontology differs, caus-
ing a problem in semantic interoperability. Heteroge-
neous systems on the Semantic Web are restricted to
committing to a single foundational ontology in order
to promote interoperability. However, no single foun-
dationalontologyisusedacrossallsystems,therewith
preventinginteroperability. Inorderfortheseapplica-
tions to share and process information correctly, there
is a need for foundational ontology interoperability,
so that ontology developers committing to a preferred
foundational ontology will achieve seamless linking
to other domain ontologies linked to another foun-
dational ontology. Such an infrastructure was envi-
sioned as the “WonderWeb Foundational Ontologies
Library” (WFOL) (Masolo et al., 2003), but this in-
frastructure still does not exist. The main precondi-
tions for a WFOL are content comparisons and ontol-
ogy mediation. Ontology mediation refers to identi-
fying and solving differences between heterogeneous
ontologies, in order to allow reuse and interoperabil-
ity. Its three main processes are alignment, mapping,
and merging (de Bruijn et al., 2006). There are only
few paper-based alignments of foundational ontolo-
gies, being between GFO and DOLCE (Herre, 2010)
and between DOLCE and BFO (Seyed, 2009; Temal
et al., 2010), which, however, are partial, with older
versions of the ontologies, informal, and/or aligned
but not mapped. To the best of our knowledge, no
systematiccomparisonofthecontentsoffoundational
ontologies has been done, nor full alignments, let
alone providing consistent mappings.
We aim to contribute to ﬁll this gap of seman-
tic interoperability by selecting three well-known
foundational ontologies, DOLCE (Masolo et al.,
2003), BFO (http://www.ifomis.org/bfo) with
RO (Smith et al., 2005), and GFO (Herre, 2010) with
which we perform a rigorous foundational ontology
content comparison and mediation to aid in achieving
foundational ontology interchangeability. The align-
mentprocessiscarriedoutbyusingthemanualalign-
ment as a gold standard and (semi-)automated align-
ment with seven alignment tools to examine them
on their capabilities to align foundational ontologies.

The accuracy and percentage of alignments that were
found vary greatly among the tools due to their di-
verse alignment algorithms, ranging from 18 to 94%
and 17 to 31%, respectively. Further alignment is-
suesappearinthetransitivityofalignmentsacrossthe
three foundational ontologies due to absence of some
entity or conﬂicting parthood theories, whilst some
may be resolved by asserting them as sibling classes.
Mapping the aligned entities whilst keeping a consis-
tent ontology reduces the feasible set from 85 align-
ments to 43 successful mappings due to disjointness
and complement axioms elsewhere in the ontology,
and due to incompatible domain and range axioms,
which in some cases can be solved from a logic view-
point by asserting subsumption instead. For each me-
diation process (alignment, mapping and mediation),
we present the issues encountered for foundational
ontology mediation and aim to solve these issues.
In the remainder of the paper, we provide a liter-
ature review in Section 2. A high-level content com-
parison of the foundational ontologies is described in
Section 3, which is followed by an analysis of align-
ments in Section 4, and of the mappings in Section 5.
We discuss the results in Section 6 and conclude in
Section 7.
2 LITERATURE REVIEW
There has not been much work done in comparing
content of the foundational ontologies. By this, we
mean comparing their classes, properties and rela-
tions. Some work on comparing the primitive rela-
tions of BFO (i.e., the Relation Ontology (RO)) and
DOLCE has been done (Seyed, 2009) where it is
found that the philosophies behind the foundational
ontologies affect the way the relations are modelled.
For instance, BFO is based on realist principles and
has no abstract entities while GFO is both descriptive
and realist in nature and allows abstract entities in an
ontology, and BFO’s parthood relation has part does
not consider abstract entities, while GFO has a part-
hoodrelationabstract has part thatconsidersabstract
entities at a higher-level than its has part relation.
Temal et al. (Temal et al., 2010) created a BFO-
DOLCE mapping in order to integrate medical in-
formation. The classes (universals or categories) are
mapped with equivalence and subsumption relations.
Basedontheolderso-calledSNAPandSPANversion
of BFO, they found that all BFO universals were suc-
cessfullymappedtoDOLCE,butnotallDOLCEenti-
ties could be mapped to BFO. These alignments were
not checked on consistency of the mappings and were
done on some First Order Logic version of the on-
tologies, where the SNAP-BFO has, e.g., Boundary,
that BFO v1.1 in OWL does not have, and DOLCE
is claimed to have Collection, which appears neither
in the principal documentation (Masolo et al., 2003)
norintheOWLizedversionofDOLCE.Someoftheir
alignments are useful, however, which we will return
to in Section 4.
FromacomputationalviewpointinsteadofanOn-
tology and modelling viewpoint, we consider several
aspects of ontology mediation and matching. Ontol-
ogy mediation (de Bruijn et al., 2006) is divided into
three operations: mapping, alignment, and merging.
To be precise in the terminology we use throughout
the paper, we provide several deﬁnitions on ontology
matching in this section, which are taken from (Eu-
zenat and Shvaiko, 2007), Chapter 3. First, there is
the actual mediation, or matching, process:
Deﬁnition1(MatchingProcess). Thematchingpro-
cess can be seen as a function f which, from a pair of
ontologies to match o and o′, an input alignment A, a
set of parameters p and a set of oracles and resources
r, returns an alignment A′ between these ontologies:
A′ = f(o,o′,A,p,r).
To be able to talk about an actual alignment or
mapping, the notion of “entity language” has to be
introduced, which is used to express precisely those
entities that will be matched.
Deﬁnition 2 (Entity language). Given an ontology
language L, an entity language QL is a function from
any ontology o ⊆ L which deﬁnes the matchable enti-
ties of ontology o.
Then, a correspondence consists of a relation be-
tween two entities in different ontologies, which is
uniquely identiﬁed and hassome conﬁdencevalue as-
signed to it.
Deﬁnition 3 (Correspondence). Given two ontolo-
gies o and o′ with associated entity languages QL
and QL′, a set of alignment relations θ and a conﬁ-
dencestructureoverΞ,acorrespondenceisa5-tuple:
〈id,e,e′,r,n〉, such that id is a unique identiﬁer of the
given correspondence, e ⊆ QL(o) and e′ ⊆ Q′
L′(o′),
r ⊆ θ, and n ⊆ Ξ.
Ontology alignment, then, is the process of spec-
ifying correspondences between entities, by using a
particular alignment relation, such as equivalence,
subsumption, or a predeﬁned similarity relation.
Deﬁnition 4 (Alignment). Given two ontologies o
and o′, an alignment is made up of a set of correspon-
dences between pairs of entities belonging to QL(o)
and QL′(o′) respectively.
Ontology mapping deals with creating correspon-
dences between ontologies based on alignments such
that the resultant ontology is still consistent and does
not have unsatisﬁable classes or relations. Euzenat

and Shvaiko do consider this with respect to models
of aligned ontologies, which is too lengthy to repeat
here,andDeBruijnetal. doesnotprovideadeﬁnition
of their idea of mapping as a ‘consistent alignment in
the context of the whole ontology’ either. Therefore,
we capture the gist in the following deﬁnition, using
Euzenat and Shvaiko’s notational conventions.
Deﬁnition 5 (Mapping). Given two ontologies o and
o′, a mapping is made up of a set of correspon-
dences between pairs of entities belonging to QL(o)
and QL′(o′), respectively, and this mapping is satis-
ﬁable and does not lead to an unsatisﬁable entity in
either o or o′.
In merging, a new merged ontology is created
from the original ontologies.
Deﬁnition 6 (Merging). Given two ontologies o and
o′, a merging is the creation of a new ontology o′′
containingoando′ andallmappingsbetweenentities
belonging to QL(o) and QL′(o′) such that o′′ does not
have unsatisﬁable entities and is consistent.
Overviews of approaches, frameworks, and tech-
nologies used to perform ontology mapping, align-
ment and merging are discussed elsewhere (e.g.,
(de Bruijn et al., 2006)), and more detail about al-
gorithms and issues can be found in (Euzenat and
Shvaiko, 2007).
A number of tasks for the problem at hand are
based on ontology mediation. Performing founda-
tional ontology mediation with automated tools is a
good approach and a starting point because there are
many foundational ontology modules, and founda-
tional ontologies are constantly being updated. It is
rather time-consuming to explore each foundational
ontology, especially when there are differences in
hierarchy and structure. By applying several tools
to align foundational ontologies, one can determine
which tools are better suited for foundational ontolo-
gies, and the type of alignments that are misaligned
or not discovered by tools. We summarize the align-
ment tools that are used in the experimental evalua-
tion, of which we note that LogMap, YAM++, Hot-
Match, Hertuda and Optima have been evaluated with
positive results by the Ontology Alignment Evalua-
tion Initiative (OAEI) in terms of their precision, re-
call and other performance measures.
H-Match (Castano et al., 2003) is an algorithm
for matching ontologies at different depth levels, with
different accuracies, based on user choices. The algo-
rithm takes into account linguistic and semantic fea-
tures of ontologies to perform matching and uses one
offourmatchingmodels: surface,shallow,deeporin-
tensive. The surface model only considers linguistic
afﬁnity between entity names to measure similarity.
In shallow, deep and intensive models, context is also
considered to determine entity similarity.
PROMPT (Noy and Musen, 2000) is an ontology
matching plug-in for Prot´eg´e that allows for compar-
ison, mappings, and merging between ontologies. It
is a semi-automatic method that invokes algorithms
based on a combination of concept-representation
structure, the relations between entities and user’s ac-
tions. PROMPT offers the user four different algo-
rithms to use for initial comparison: lexical match-
ing, FOAM plugin, lexical matching with synonyms
and using UMLS concept identiﬁers for matching. It
is only supported in older versions of Prot´eg´e, which
makes it unstable.
LogMap (Jim´enez-Ruiz and Cuenca Grau, 2011)
automatically generates mappings between ontolo-
gies using logic-based semantics of the input ontolo-
gies. It offers an improvement to other mapping tools
in that it addresses scalability and logical inconsisten-
cies. LogMap allows a user to upload ontologies in a
number of formats and implements existing reasoners
to check the satisﬁability of the ontologies.
YAM++ (Ngo and Bellahsene, 2012) aligns en-
tities by information retrieval or machine learning if
training data is available. Three matchers are imple-
mentedinYAM++: anelementlevelmatcher, a struc-
tural matcher and a semantic matcher. The element
levelandstructuralmapperdiscoveralignmentswhile
the semantic matcher revises these alignments to re-
move inconsistencies and ensure logical mappings.
HotMatch (Dang et al., 2012) is a tool based on a
combination of many matching algorithms. The two
types of algorithms are element level and structural
matching. However, there is more than one of each
implemented. TherearealsoﬁltersinHotMatch,used
to remove duplicate mappings found by the matchers.
Uponinputofasourceandtargetontology,HotMatch
deploys its matchers and ﬁlters sequentially resulting
in mappings between the two.
Hertuda (Hertling, 2012) is an entity matcher that
applies element level matching with a string compar-
ison. The alignments generated by Hertuda are only
satisﬁable in OWL Lite/DL. As a result, object prop-
erties in the ontologies are handled separately. This
may cause some difﬁculties in aligning object prop-
erties in the foundational ontologies because their do-
mains and ranges affect the alignments.
Optima (Kolli and Doshi, 2008) is a fully auto-
matic tool which iteratively improves alignments. It
is aimed at aligning large ontologies but may also be
used for smaller ontologies. Its similarity measure is
based on both syntactic and semantic similarity.

3 FOUNDATIONAL ONTOLOGY
CONTENT COMPARISON
In this section, we provide an informal content com-
parison between the foundational ontology pairs by
identifying differences and similarities between the
them. A content comparison is beneﬁcial in that it
forms the basis for performing ontology mediation
operations. A content comparison does not include
abstract comparisons such as those based on philo-
sophicalchoices,ontologicalalignmentsandsoftware
engineering properties, which has been addressed
elsewhere (Khan and Keet, 2012), but rather a high-
level comparison of the structure, organisation, and
entities of the foundational ontologies.
DOLCE, BFO and GFO contain both 3D and 4D
entities. BothBFOandGFOnametheseentitiesCon-
tinuant and Occurrent while DOLCE names them en-
durant and perdurant. Some syntactic variants ex-
ist between DOLCE, BFO, and GFO, e.g., DOLCE’s
space-region vs. BFO’s SpatialRegion vs. GFO’s
Spatial region. In DOLCE, BFO, and GFO, classes
that share the same name and idea are process, func-
tion and role.
DOLCE entities are of type particular, BFO’s en-
tities are Universals while GFO contains a combina-
tion of the two, both Individual and Universal entities.
DOLCE and BFO have similar structures at a high-
level only in that both have separate branches of 3D
and 4D entities. GFO’s high-level structure is differ-
ent as it offers a distinction between Category and In-
dividual entities. DOLCE’s endurant and perdurant
branches are linked by participation relations; BFO’s
and GFO’s 3D and 4D entity branches are completely
independent of each other.
DOLCE and GFO have advanced support for rep-
resenting entity properties (e.g., colour) and their val-
ues (e.g., blue) while BFO has limited support for
this. To describe these entities, DOLCE uses the
terms quality, quale and quality-space, BFO uses the
term Quality while GFO names these entities Prop-
erty, Property value and Value space. DOLCE’s
quality branch is disjoint to its endurant and perdu-
rant branches. In BFO, on the other hand, Qual-
ity is subsumed by Continuant branch, while GFO
has Property subsumed by the higher-level Individ-
ual. BFO’s temporal entities, including temporal re-
gions, intervals, and instants, are subsumed by Oc-
current, while DOLCE’s temporal entities are split up
into three parts, being temporal regions that are sub-
sumed by abstract entities, temporal qualities that are
subsumed by quality entities, and subclasses of perdu-
rants. All of GFO’s temporal entities are subsumed
by its Space-time entity, which is disjoint to its Con-
crete and Abstract entities. Most of DOLCE’s spatial
entities are subsumed by its abstract entity with the
exception of spatial-location-q which is subsumed by
quality, while GFO’s spatial entities are subsumed by
its space-time entity. BFO’s SpatialRegion entity is
subsumed by Continuant. DOLCE and GFO have ab-
stract entities while BFO does not.
DOLCE and GFO contain relational properties.
BFO does not have relational properties included in
the ontology, but rather as a separate ontology, the
Relational Ontology (RO) (Smith et al., 2005). BFO
2.0 is currently being developed, where BFO is in-
tegrated with RO. DOLCE’s relational properties are
all based on either of its six primitive relations: part-
hood, temporary parthood, constitution, participation,
quality,andquale. Formereology,DOLCEadoptsthe
axioms of General Extensional Mereology (GEM).
BFO core is a comprehensive mereology represented
in ﬁrst-order logic and contains collections, sums and
universal axioms. GFO’s mereology contains the fol-
lowing axioms: antisymmetry, transitivity, set inclu-
sion,properparthood,andotherGFO-speciﬁcaxioms
based on these.
Thus, the organisation of entities within the three
ontologies differ. In some cases, entities that seem
similar fall in contradicting or disjoint classes. These
differences in structure and organisation may cause
inconsistencies when performing mapping, as we
shall see later in detail.
4 ALIGNMENT
For foundational ontology alignment, i.e., aligning on
an entity-by-entity basis, certain aspects of the un-
derlying philosophies of each foundational ontology
have been ignored, because else it would result in few
ornoalignmentsandforpracticalusageoftheirOWL
ﬁles, they are less pressing issues (e.g., DOLCE is
descriptive and contains particulars, while BFO is re-
alist and contains universals). We align classes and
object properties with equivalence relations ﬁrst, and
use subsumption relations afterward to resolve some
mapping inconsistencies.
We create alignments for 20 pairs of ontologies.
These ontologies include DOLCE-Lite, BFO, GFO,
FunctionalParticipation, SpatialRelations, and Tem-
poralRelations (which are more-detailed modules of
DOLCE), BFORO and GFO-Basic. BFORO refers
to the merged ontology of BFO with the RO, and
GFO-Basicisaless-detailedmoduleofGFO.Weper-
form ontology alignment by using existing tools, doc-
umentation and manually using the content compari-
son, entity axioms and annotations. Further, for each
resource (tool, documentation or manual alignment),
we measure its accuracy by ﬁrstly examining each of

its output alignments to determine whether or not the
equivalence relation is correct. Thereafter we deﬁne
accuracy as the number of ‘correct’ alignments over
the total alignments given by the resource (Eq. 1),
where ‘correct’ denotes the alignment is also in the
set of alignments found manually, i.e., what is typi-
cally considered as the ‘gold standard’. We deﬁne the
found measure of the resources as the number of cor-
rect alignments over the total possible correct align-
ments, after manual intervention (Eq. 2).
Accuracy = |correct alignments|
|total alignmentsresource| ×100 (1)
Found = |correct alignments|
|total alignmentsgold| ×100 (2)
4.1 Alignment results
Wedescribetheresultsofthemanualalignmentsﬁrst,
and then the results obtained with the matching tools.
4.1.1 Manual alignments
The yield of the manual alignments between the
main foundational ontologies (DOLCE-Lite, BFO
and GFO) resulted in 17 alignments for DOLCE-Lite
↔ BFO, 23 alignments for BFO ↔ GFO and 35
alignments for GFO ↔ DOLCE-Lite, hence, 75 in to-
tal; the complete set of alignments can be accessed
at http://www.thezfiles.co.za/ROMULUS/. Of
these 75 alignments, 37 are for alignments be-
tween object properties and are displayed in Ta-
bles 1, 2, and 3. The mapped class alignments
are available and discussed elsewhere (Khan and
Keet, 2013) and online accessible, and the differ-
encebetweenclassalignmentsandmappingsforGFO
↔ DOLCE-Lite are displayed in Table 4. When
we consider entity alignments including the related
modules of the foundational ontologies (e.g., GFO-
Basic), there is a total of 85 alignments. Natu-
rally, there are many more than 85 alignments if
we consider identical alignments that occur among
the same entities in related modules; e.g., DOLCE-
Lite:particular ↔ GFO:Individual and FunctionalPar-
ticipation:particular ↔ GFO:Individual. There are 14
alignments common between these three ontologies,
which is displayed in Table 5.
The manual alignments were aided by the GFO
documentation (Herre, 2010) and checked against the
alignments proposed by (Temal et al., 2010; Seyed,
2009). The GFO documentation (Herre, 2010) con-
tains a list of similarities between GFO and DOLCE
which helped with the alignment process. Some of
the alignments could not be used, however, due to
changes in the two foundational ontologies. We were
Table 1: Equivalence alignments for relational properties
between DOLCE-Lite and BFO; the alignments numbered
in bold font can also be mapped.
DOLCE-Lite BFORO
1. generic-location located in
2. generic-location-of location of
3. part has part
4. part-of part of
5. proper-part has proper part
6. proper-part-of proper part of
7. participant has participant
8. participant-in participates in
Table 2: Equivalence alignments for relational properties
between DOLCE-Lite and GFO; the alignments numbered
in bold font can also be mapped.
DOLCE-Lite GFO
1. generic-constituent has constituent part
2. generic-constituent-of constituent part of
3. generically-
dependant-on
depends on
4. generic-dependant necessary for
5. has-quale has value
6. quale-of value of
7. boundary has boundary
8. boundary-of boundary of
9. q-present-at exists at
10. temporary-
participant-in
agent in
11. temporary-participant has agent
12. generic-location occupies
13. generic-location-of occupied by
14. part abstract has part
15. part-of abstract part of
16. proper-part has proper part
17. proper-part-of proper part of
18. participant has participant
19. participant-in participates in
Table 3: Equivalence alignments for relational properties in
BFO and GFO; the alignments in bold are also mapped.
BFORO GFO
1. has part has part
2. part of part of
3. has proper-part has proper part
4. proper part of proper part of
5. has participant has participant
6. participant in participates
7. located in occupies
8. location of occupied by
9. has agent has agent
10. agent in agent in

able to use 42% of the alignments from the docu-
mentation. We discuss four equivalence alignments
from (Temal et al., 2010). We changed the align-
ment bfo:ProcessualEntities ↔ dolce:perdurant to
bfo:Occurrent ↔ dolce:perdurant, because by deﬁni-
tion occurrents and perdurants both represent entities
that have temporal parts and unfold in time. Temal
et al.’s alignment of bfo:Quality with dolce:physical-
quality is more precise than ours, because, as men-
tioned above, we chose to ignore the some philoso-
phies (the realist debate) with the hope of achieving
a higher number of alignments. That is, our mapping
has bfo:Quality ↔ dolce:quality, thereby ignoring the
fact that BFO does not consider abstract entities. We
agree with bfo:SpatialRegion ↔ dolce:space-region
and bfo:TemporalRegion ↔ dolce:temporal-region,
and use this equivalence, too. Seyed (Seyed, 2009)
examined only three relations—dependency, quality,
and constitution—and found that they are different in
DOLCE and BFO. The basic numbers of the align-
ments are included in Table 6.
Table 4: Equivalence alignments for classes between
DOLCE-Lite and GFO ontologies; the alignments num-
bered in bold font can also be mapped.
DOLCE-Lite GFO
1. particular Individual
2. endurant Presential
3. physical-endurant Discrete presential
4. physical-object Material object
5. amount-of-matter Amount of substrate
6. perdurant Occurrent
7. process Process
8. state State
9. abstract Abstract
10. set Set
11. quality Property
12. quale Property value
13. quality-space Value space
14. time-interval Chronoid
15. space-region Spatial Region
16. temporal-region Temporal Region
4.1.2 Automated alignments
Table 7 lists the numbers of alignments found by the
selected tools. We describe some further data in the
remainder of this section.
H-Match generated many alignments, but most of
the output was not accurate. Many entity pairs that
were matched using H-Match were found to be incor-
rectly aligned; e.g., DOLCE-Lite:quale ↔ bfo:Role.
This resulted in us being able to use only 18% of
these alignments, with the rest being false positives.
Table 5: Common alignments between DOLCE-Lite, BFO
and GFO.
DOLCE-Lite BFORO GFO
Class
1. endurant Independent
Continuant
Presential
2. physical-object Object Material object
3. perdurant Occurrent Occurrent
4. process Process Process
5. quality Quality Property
6. space-region SpatialRegion Spatial region
7. temporal-
region
Temporal-
Region
Temporal region
Relational property
1. proper-part has proper part has proper part
2. proper-part-of proper part of proper part of
3. participant has participant has participant
4. participant-in participates in participates in
5. generic-
location
located in occupies
6. generic-
location-of
location of occupied by
Table 6: Comparison of manually performed alignment ac-
curacies of the GFO documentation (Herre, 2010), related
works, and ours, and aggregates for mappings.
Seyed Herre Temal
et al.
Ours
Class alignments
DOLCE-Lite
↔ BFO
- - 2/7 9/9
BFO ↔ GFO - - - 13/13
GFO ↔
DOLCE-Lite
- 13/31 - 16/16
Object property alignments
DOLCE-Lite
↔ BFO
0 - - 8/8
BFO ↔ GFO - - - 10/10
GFO ↔
DOLCE-Lite
- 0 - 19/19
Overall alignments
Total 0/0 13/31 2/7 75/75
Accuracy 0% 42% 29% 100%
Found 0% 37% 12% 100%
Overall mappings
Total 0/0 8/31 1/7 40/40
Accuracy 0% 26% 14% 100%
Found 0% 61% 9% 100%
PROMPT was generally unstable resulting in force
closure of the application. It generated suggestions
of which we were able to use 56%, with the rest being
false positives; e.g., bfo:Site ↔ gfo:Situoid.
While LogMap provided few alignments between
the foundational ontologies (less than ten in all
cases), most alignments were accurate. The one
false positive in LogMap was the alignment of
bfo:IndependentContinuant ↔ gfo:Independent.

Table 7: Comparison of alignment accuracies of the matching tools and aggregates for mappings.
H-Match PROMPT LogMap YAM++ Hot Match Hertuda Optima
Class alignments
DOLCE-Lite↔BFO 4/16 3/8 2/2 4/4 3/3 3/3 4/12
BFO↔GFO 5/31 7/12 7/8 6/7 7/7 7/7 8/14
GFO↔DOLCE-Lite 4/25 4/8 3/3 8/11 5/5 5/5 5/16
Object property alignments
DOLCE-Lite↔BFO 0 0 0 0 0 0 0/1
BFO↔GFO 0 0 4/4 0 0 0 1/3
GFO↔DOLCE-Lite 0 4/4 0 5/14 5/7 6/8 2/23
Overall alignments
Total 13/72 18/32 16/17 23/36 20/22 21/23 20/69
Accuracy 18% 56% 94% 64% 91% 91% 29%
Found 17% 24% 21% 31% 27% 28% 27%
Overall mappings
Total 10/72 11/32 16/17 15/36 11/22 12/23 13/69
Accuracy 14% 34% 94% 42% 50% 52% 19%
Found 25% 28% 40% 38% 28% 30% 33%
YAM++ generated many alignments. However, while
most of the alignments for DOLCE ↔ BFO and BFO
↔ GFO were accurate, only about half were accurate
for GFO ↔ DOLCE. Overall we were able to use
almost64%ofitsalignments. LikeLogMap,YAM++
also incorrectly aligned bfo:IndependentContinuant
↔ gfo:Independent. Some of YAM++’s other false
positive alignments include dolce:generic-constituent
↔ gfo:has sequence constituent, dolce:quality-
space ↔ gfo:Space and dolce:temporary-proper-part
↔ gfo:has constituent part.
HotMatch generated a fair amount of alignments
between the ontologies. Overall, we were able to
use 91% of HotMatch’s alignments, with just 2 align-
ments out of all 22 being false positives. Hertuda’s
output was surprisingly similar to HotMatch’s output,
with just one more alignment than HotMatch. We
were able to use 91% of Hertuda’s alignments, with
just 2 alignments out of all 23 being false positives.
CommonfalsepositivesinYAM++,HertudaandHot-
Match were the alignments between dolce:part ↔
gfo:has part and dolce:part-of ↔ gfo:part of, which
is discussed in Section 4.2.1. Optima generated many
alignments for each pair. However, there were many
falsepositives,consequentlywewereabletouse29%
of its alignments overall. This may be because Op-
tima is aimed at aligning large ontologies and the
foundational ontologies in question are of reasonable
size. Optima incorrectly aligned gfo:Continuous ↔
bfo:Continuant, dolce:Region ↔ bfo:SpatialRegion
and dolce:dependent-place ↔ bfo:Dependent.
4.2 Alignment Issues
We have encountered two types of issues in align-
ment: transitivity, where there was no ‘full circle’
alignment between some entities of the three ontolo-
gies, and approximate alignments, where there is no
clear relationship to describe the match.
4.2.1 Transitivity
Transitivity in entity alignments works as follows: if
the equivalence relation holds between entities from
the ﬁrst and second ontology and it holds between
entities from the second and third ontology; it nec-
essarily holds between entities from the ﬁrst and
third ontology. Applying transitivity to entity align-
ments assists in detecting errors. For instance, if
one were to align dolce:endurant ↔ gfo:Persistant,
and gfo:Persistant ↔ bfo:Continuant, then by tran-
sitivity this means that dolce:endurant is equivalent
to bfo:Continuant, which is incorrect. In most cases,
the foundational ontology alignments are transitive.
There were two types of exceptions, being the ab-
sence of an entity and what can be termed conse-
quences of conﬂicting philosophies.
Absence of an entity. An alignment cannot be a
candidate for transitivity if there is an equivalence be-
tween only two out of the three ontologies. From the
three main ontology alignments, the following ones
were not transitive due to the absence of an entity:
• Absence of a DOLCE entity (7 cases): bfo:Entity
↔ gfo:Entity, bfo:DependentContinuant ↔
gfo:Dependent, bfo:ObjectBoundary↔gfo:Mate-
rial boundary, bfo:Function ↔ gfo:Function,
bfo:Role ↔ gfo:Role, bfo:has agent ↔
gfo:has agent, bfo:agent in ↔ gfo:agent in.
• Absence of a GFO entity (1 case): dolce:spatio-
temporal-region ↔ bfo:SpatioTemporalRegion
• AbsenceofaBFOentity(17cases): gfo:Individual
↔ dolce:particular, gfo:Amount of substrate
↔ dolce:amount-of-matter, gfo:State ↔

dolce:state, gfo:Abstract ↔ dolce:abstract,
gfo:Set ↔ dolce:set, gfo:Property value ↔
dolce:quale, gfo:Value space ↔ dolce:quality-
space, gfo:Chronoid ↔ dolce:time interval,
gfo:has constituant part ↔ dolce:generic-
consitituant, gfo:constituant part of ↔
dolce:generic-constituant-of, gfo:necessary for
↔ dolce:generic-dependent, gfo:depends on ↔
dolce:generically-dependent-on, gfo:has value
↔ dolce:has-quale, gfo:value of ↔ dolce:quale-
of, gfo:has boundary ↔ dolce:boundary,
gfo:boundary of ↔ dolce:boundary-of,
gfo:exists at ↔ dolce:q-present-at
From this type of transitivity issue, we see that for the
three main ontology alignments, in most cases BFO
entities are absent. There are a few cases of absent
DOLCEentitiesandonecaseofanabsentGFOentity.
Conﬂicting philosophies. The philosophies of
foundational ontologies affect their entities to a cer-
tain extent. In some cases, two entities that are
aligned to each other may not be aligned to the same
entity of a third ontology.
• dolce:physical-endurant ↔ bfo:Material-
Entity, dolce:physical-endurant ↔ gfo:Discrete
presential and bfo:MaterialEntity ↔ gfo:Material
persistant. Let us align bfo:MaterialEntity ↔
dolce:physical-endurant, ignore their underlying
philosophies (i.e., that BFO is an ontology of
universals and DOLCE of particulars). However,
in GFO, there are two entities for representing
this type of entity, based on distinct philosophical
notions: gfo:Discrete presential, being subsumed
gfo:Individual, is suited for dolce:physical-
endurant while gfo:Material persistant, being
subsumed by gfo:Universal, is suited for
bfo:MaterialEntity.
• dolce:part ↔ bfo:has part, dolce:part ↔
gfo:has abstract part and bfo:has part ↔
gfo:has part (idem for their inverses). In
DOLCE, both the domain and range of part is
particular. In BFORO, there is no domain and
range for has part. In GFO, both the domain and
range of abstract has part is Item, while both the
domain and range for has part is Concrete. The
former relational property may be better suited
for DOLCE because it is a descriptive ontology
and contains abstract entities. The latter is better
suited for BFORO as it is a realist ontology,
representing the world as is, thereby containing
concrete entities only.
The ontology matching tools discussed in Sec-
tion 4.1.2 misaligned dolce:part ↔ gfo:has part and
their inverses. This is because object property incon-
sistencies are not fully recognised by reasoners (Keet,
2012), hence their conﬂicting domains and ranges did
not affect the satisﬁability of the ontology.
4.2.2 Approximate Alignments
There are a number of approximate alignments be-
tween foundational ontology entities. By this we
meanthattheyarenotequivalenttoeachotherorsub-
sumed by one another, but share some common char-
acteristics. By identifying these relations between
theseentities,foundationalontologydeveloperscould
possibly relate them as sibling classes by grouping
them both under a common superclass. We mention
three of them.
• dolce:arbitrary-sum, bfo:ObjectAggregate and
gfo:Conﬁguration: All three of these entities de-
scribe a collection of something. dolce:arbitrary-
sum, however, has no unity criterion e.g., a pencil
and laundry basket are together a dolce:arbitrary-
sum, and it can contain both dolce:physical-
endurant and dolce:non-physical-endurant enti-
ties. dolce: physical-endurant is not restricted
just to instances of dolce:physical-object but can
possibly include dolce:feature and dolce:amount-
of-matter. bfo:ObjectAggregate, on the other
hand, has overall unity and can be considered
as a whole. It is restricted to bfo:Object only,
and in the case of BFO, all objects are physi-
cal. gfo:Conﬁguration is simply a collection of
gfo:Presential facts. gfo:Presentials are not re-
stricted to whole physical objects and can include
other gfo:Presential entities. For this reason, it
cannot equate to bfo:ObjectAggregate. Further-
more, it holds a restriction that it must contain
at least one material entity. dolce:arbitrary-sum
could contain physical, non-physical or both enti-
ties, with no restrictions.
• dolce:state and bfo:SpatioTemporalInstant:
DOLCE describes dolce:state by using an exam-
ple of a rock erosion describing state as a time in-
terval of the erosion is collapsed into a time point.
Similarly BFO deﬁnes bfo:SpatioTemporalInstant
as a “connected spatiotemporal region at a
speciﬁc moment”. The difference between the
two lies in the fact that dolce:state is homeomeric
while bfo:SpatioTemporalInstant is not.
• dolce:relevant-part and bfo:FiatObjectPart:
DOLCE describes dolce:relevant-part as a feature
that is a relevant part of their host; e.g., the edge
of a cube. BFO deﬁnes bfo:FiatObjectPart as a
material entity that is part of an object but not
demarcated by physical discontinuities; e.g.,
the lower portion of the leg. In this sense they
are both part objects that are physical entities.
However, it is unclear whether dolce:relevant-part

is demarcated by physical discontinuities or not
and whether BFO’s ﬁat object parts are ‘relevant’
somehow. This requires further investigation.
5 MAPPING AND MERGING
Ontology Mapping uses the alignments from the
alignment process to create correspondences between
entities in the ontologies. The output from the align-
ment process is broader, while the output from the
mapping process is narrower as inconsistencies affect
the mapping process. Merging is performed by creat-
ing a new ontology of the source ontologies with their
mappingsbetweeneachother. Ontologymappingand
merging was performed by relating classes and object
properties in Prot´eg´e. Entities were mapped in the
order of their level in the hierarchy, from higher to
lower level, because foundational ontologies by deﬁ-
nition are general high-level ontologies. Therefore, in
mapping, preference must be ﬁrst given to high-level
entities to have agreement among general entities and
avoid inconsistencies at that level.
Alignments that cannot be mapped due to logical
inconsistencies result in unsuccessful mappings. The
inconsistencieswereidentiﬁedbyusingthefollowing
method. For each candidate class mapping:
1. Assert the equivalence for the found alignment.
2. Run the automated reasoner.
3. Check if there are any unsatisﬁable classes.
4. If there are unsatisﬁable classes, use the reasoner
explanation feature to generate an explanation.
5. Analyse explanations.
6. Remove inconsistent mapping, if applicable.
For each candidate object property mapping, since
object property inconsistencies and ﬂaws are not
properly recognised by reasoners (Keet, 2012), we
identiﬁed inconsistencies by checking if an object
property pair’s domain and range restrictions are sat-
isﬁable by using the above method.
The numbers in bold face in Table 5 represent the
alignments that resulted in successful mappings be-
tween the common entities of the three main ontolo-
gies. From the 14 alignments in Table 5, six success-
ful mappings exist. Recall from the previous section
on alignment, there was a total of 85 distinct align-
mentsbetweenallfoundationalontologiesandrelated
modules, and 75 alignments between the main foun-
dational ontologies. Performing the method to iden-
tify inconsistencies in alignments resulted in 42 dis-
tinct logical inconsistencies of which 35 alone were
from the main ontologies. From all the distinct equiv-
alence alignments, only half were satisﬁable and re-
sultedinsuccessfulmappings. Comparingthesemap-
pings to the alignments found by the tools, LogMap
doubled its percentage found to 40% and performed
bestcomparedtothesixothersevaluated(seeTable7,
bottom three rows).
To solve inconsistencies in the mapping attempts,
we analysed each alignment on the logical explana-
tion for the inconsistency and the description of the
entityprovidedbythefoundationalontologydevelop-
ers,andcheckedwhetheritwaspossibletochangethe
alignment from equivalence to subsumption. How-
ever, there are still many unsolvable inconsistencies,
mainly due to hierarchical and structural differences
in the foundational ontologies. Due to space limi-
tations, we describe only a representative selection
of the logical inconsistencies and (logically satisﬁ-
able) possible solutions; the full list of inconsisten-
cies is available at http://www.thezfiles.co.za/
ROMULUS/.
Inconsistencies due to disjoint classes. For this
type of inconsistency, the entities to be aligned are
disjoint to each other, either directly, through higher-
level equivalence relations or through their subclasses
or superclasses. If entities are disjoint, they cannot
overlap, hence cannot be equivalent.
• dolce:temporal-region - gfo:Temporal region -
bfo:TemporalRegion: The issue with incompat-
ible temporal regions between BFO, GFO, and
DOLCE is depicted in Fig. 1 and is a result of
the OWL DisjointClasses class axiom between
gfo:Concrete, gfo:Space Time and gfo:Abstract,
and between dolce:Abstract and dolce:Per-
durant, or, from the other viewpoint: because
BFO made TemporalRegion an Occurrent,
DOLCE made it Abstract, and GFO neither. This
does not seem to be resolvable.
• bfo:Role - gfo:Role: gfo:Processual role is a sub-
class of gfo:Role and gfo:Process. gfo:Process
is a subclass of gfo:Occurrent. gfo:Occurrent is
equivalent to bfo:Occurrent. bfo:Role is a sub-
class of bfo:Continuant. bfo:Continuant is dis-
joint to bfo:Occurrent. In this equivalence re-
lation, both gfo:Role and gfo:Occurrent are su-
perclasses of gfo:Processual role, and bfo:Role
is a subclass of bfo:Continuant; gfo:Occurrent
and bfo:Continuant are disjoint, hence the two
classes cannot be equivalent. Solution: Logi-
cally, bfo:Role cannot be equivalent to gfo:Role.
However, bfo:Role can be subsumed by gfo:Role.
Therefore the relation can be changed to gfo:Role
subsumes bfo:Role.
• gfo:necessary for - dolce:generic-dependent: If
we were to equate these object properties, we
would have to assume that their domains and
ranges are equivalent, which is not the case;
the situation is depicted in Fig. 2. Solution:

bfo:TemporalRegion
bfo:Occurent gfo:Occurrent
gfo:Concrete gfo:Space_Time
gfo:Temporal_Region
×
≡
declaring equivalence results in inconsistency due to
disjointness among higher-level categories
×gfo:Abstract dolce:Abstract≡
dolce:temporal-region
×dolce:Perdurant≡
bfo:TemporalRegion
bfo:Occurent
Figure1: Graphicaldepictionofwhythealignedgfo:Temporal Region,bfo:TemporalRegion,anddolce:temporal-region cannot
be mapped in any way without causing an inconsistency; ≡: aligned entities, ×: disjoint entities.
gfo:Item
gfo:Category gfo:Individual× ≡ 
declaring equivalence results in
inconsistency due to disjointness
and mappings among higher-
level categories
dolce:Particular
gfo:necessary_for
dolce:generic-dependent
Figure 2: Visualisation of the root cause of the
non-mappablegfo:necessary for andDOLCE-Lite:generic-
dependent; ×: disjointness, ≡: equivalence mapping.
Logically, gfo:necessary for cannot be equiva-
lent to dolce:generic-dependent, because equat-
ing their domains and ranges causes inconsis-
tencies. However, dolce:generic-dependent’s
domain and range, dolce:particular can logi-
cally be subsumed by gfo:necessary for’s do-
main and range, gfo:Item. Therefore the relation
can be changed to gfo:necessary for subsumes
bfo:generic-dependent.
• dolce:generic-location - bfo:located in: This
issue is due to disjointness among domain/range.
dolce:generic-location’s range is dolce:particular
and bfo:located in’s range is bfo:Continuant.
bfo:Continuant is disjoint to bfo:Occurrent
and bfo:Occurrent ≡ dolce:perdurant. In
DOLCE, perdurant v ∃has-Quality.temporal-
location-q and the domain of dolce:has-
Quality is dolce:particular (the superclass of
dolce:perdurant). Thus, bfo:Continuant is dis-
joint to ∃has-Quality.temporal-location-q, and
cannot be equivalent, causing the range re-
strictions to be unsatisﬁable in the alignment.
Therefore dolce:generic-location cannot map to
bfo:located in.
Other unresolvable cases are, among others, dolce:set
- gfo:Set and dolce:quality-space - gfo:Value space.
Inconsistencies due to complement classes. For
this type of inconsistency, the entities to be aligned
were found to be complements of each other, either
directly, through higher-level equivalences or through
subsumption. We describe here one such case.
gfo:Material_persistant
gfo:Universal gfo:Item
≡ 
declaring equivalence results in
inconsistency due to the complement
bfo:IC
instantiated_by some
gfo:Individual
NOT instantiated_by some
gfo:Presential
bfo:MaterialEntity
Figure 3: Visualisation of the root cause of the non-
mappable bfo:MaterialEntity and gfo:Material persistant; ≡:
equivalence mapping, IC = IndependentContinuant.
• bfo:MaterialEntity - gfo:Material persistant,
which is visualised in Fig. 3. The cru-
cial aspect in GFO is the class axiom
Universal v ∃instantiated by.Item, and the com-
plement for individuals. Concerning mappings,
bfo:IndependentContinuant ≡ gfo:Presential.
However, GFO has Presential v Individual
and Individual v ¬∃instantiated by.Item.
Thus, gfo:Material persistant is a subclass
of gfo:instantiated by some gfo:Item while
bfo:MaterialEntity is a subclass of the com-
plement of that class, hence bfo:MaterialEntity
cannot be equivalent to gfo:Material persistant.
Solution: The alignment can be changed into
bfo:MaterialEntity - gfo:Discrete presential,
which avoids the complement issue but it is
not free of argument (recall the “conﬂicting
philosophies” item in Section 4.2.1).
6 DISCUSSION
Given the size of the ontologies and our high toler-
ancebyignoringunderlyingphilosophies,theamount
of alignments, and, even more so, the amount of map-
pings is less than one may have expected; or: once
investigated in detail, the foundational ontologies are,
atpresent,notparticularlyinterchangeableevenatthe
logical level. Only six pairwise mappings exist, i.e.,
theybeing,essentially,equivalentthroughoutallthree
examined foundational ontologies.
Concerning feasibility to carry out automated
alignments, in most cases, the tools evaluated with

the OAEI performed better than the others, with the
exception of Optima. LogMap had the highest ac-
curacy, because it also considers the logic-based se-
mantics of the ontologies and uses automated reason-
ing services throughout the process, therewith elim-
inating those false positives that would have led to
a logical inconsistency. However, LogMap gener-
ated very few alignments compared to other accu-
rate tools (YAM++, Hertuda and HotMatch), indicat-
ing that the additional heuristics implemented are too
strict at least for foundational ontology alignment.
Most false positive alignments generated by
the tools, such as bfo:IndependentContinuant ↔
gfo:Independent, indicate that the algorithms imple-
ment syntactic matching, which, based on the results
we obtained, is not sufﬁcient or suitable for foun-
dational ontology matching because many entities
have a common syntax e.g., dolce:quality-space ↔
gfo:Space bothhavethestring‘space’incommonbut
areentirelydifferententities; Table8includesaselec-
tionofsuchfalsepositivesthatarecausedbysyntactic
matching in the tools when aligning the three founda-
tionalontologies. Thetoolsfailedtorecognisesimple
alignments such as dolce:perdurant ↔ gfo:Occurrent,
bfo:Quality ↔ gfo:Property. In this sense, semantic
matching is not considered, or if it is, it fails to recog-
nise synonyms of the philosophical scope on which
foundational ontologies are built upon. Structural
matching is not an effective method either, due to the
fact that the hierarchies and structures of the founda-
tional ontologies differ greatly which causes the root
distances of mappable entities to differ. For aligning
foundational ontologies, it will be useful if existing
semantic matchers would include something alike a
‘philosophy WordNet’ that specialises in philosophi-
cal terms, synonyms, and deﬁnitions used in founda-
tional ontologies.
The results of the tool analysis is a good indica-
tion of which tools to experiment with for founda-
tional ontology alignment in general. However, they
found less than a third of the actual alignments at this
stage, and therefore it is still vital to perform manual
alignment for foundational ontologies. The tools also
did not generate subsumption relations for any of the
alignments, but this could perhaps be an extension to
the basic idea of LogMap by means of another call
to the reasoner. One could investigate whether Op-
tima is useful to identify accurate alignments among
the larger foundational ontologies SUMO (Niles and
Pease, 2001) and YAMATO (Mizoguchi, 2010).
On a positive note, the systematised list of issues
now can be taken up by ontologists. While some of
the inconsistencies found are quite elaborate, others
should be easier to resolve both ontologically (philo-
sophically) and where in the ontology the entity is
Table 8: False positives caused by syntactic matching gen-
erated by the alignment tools; the terms in italics represent
the strings that are common between aligned entities.
DOLCE-Lite BFO
physical-region ConnectedSpatio
TemporalRegion
non-physical-object Object
region SpatioTemporalRegion
BFO GFO
IndependentContinuant Independent
Site Situoid
Continuant Continuous
GFO DOLCE-Lite
has sequence
constituent
generic-constituent
has-part part
Space quality-space
positioned; e.g., the notion of a mathematical Set is
fairly well investigated already, and likewise the dif-
ferent theories of parthood. As such, the results pre-
sented here provide a solid foundation for ample on-
tological investigations. From an engineering view-
point and in case of urgent need for interoperability,
one could take a quite different strategy: OWL 2 EL
doesnothavenegation,andthereforeitshouldbepos-
sibletoassertmoremappingsbetweentheOWL2EL
modules of the foundational ontologies. Whether that
isthebeststrategyisadifferentmatter,anditdoesnot
take away the substantial list for which there was no
transitivity due to ‘missing’ entities. In any case, we
now know that some mappings are possible, hence,
also some foundational ontology interoperability.
7 CONCLUSION
The foundational ontologies DOLCE, BFO, and GFO
were pairwise aligned and mapped. They were
aligned manually, which served as the ‘gold stan-
dard’, and with the aid of seven alignment tools. The
accuracy and percentage of alignment found were
compared, where LogMap had the highest accuracy
with 94% and HotMatch and Hertuda as close sec-
ond, and YAM++ found the most correct alignments
(31% of the total manual alignments among the three
main ontologies (75)). The evaluation of the tools in-
dicated that the algorithms currently implemented by
thetoolsarenotwell-suitedforfoundationalontology
mediation. Semantic matching in the tools need to be
improved to include philosophical synonyms which
are used in foundational ontologies. Declaring the
correspondences in all ontology ﬁles based on its 85

alignments resulted in only 43 mappings, with the re-
maining 42 causing logical inconsistencies. The in-
consistencies are due primarily to differences in their
respective hierarchical structure with conﬂicting ax-
ioms, such as complement and disjointness, and in-
compatible domain and range restriction. On closer
inspection, some inconsistencies may be resolved us-
ing subsumption or making them sibling classes.
Future research includes mapping other founda-
tional ontologies, adding subsumption mappings, and
evaluating the current alignments with the founda-
tional ontology developers. We also aim to imple-
mentafacilityforcommunityinputonthealignments
and mappings, which could to be facilitated via the
foundational ontology library that is available online
at http://www.thezfiles.co.za/ROMULUS/.
REFERENCES
Castano, S., Ferrara, A., and Montanelli, S. (2003). H-
MATCH: an algorithm for dynamically matching on-
tologies in peer-based systems. In The ﬁrst Inter-
national Workshop on Semantic Web and Databases
(SWDB’03), pages 231–250, Humboldt-Universitt,
Berlin, Germany.
Dang, T. T., Gabriel, A., Hertling, S., Roskosch, P.,
Wlotzka, M., Zilke, J. R., Janssen, F., and Paulheim,
H. (2012). HotMatch results for OEAI 2012. In Sev-
enth International Workshop on Ontology Matching
(OM’12), volume 946 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings. CEUR-WS.org.
de Bruijn, J., Ehrig, M., Feier, C., Mart´ıns-Recuerda, F.,
Scharffe, F., and Weiten, M. (2006). Ontology medi-
ation, merging, and aligning. In Semantic Web Tech-
nologies, pages 1–20. Wiley Online Library.
Euzenat, J. and Shvaiko, P. (2007). Ontology Matching.
Springer.
Herre,H.(2010). GeneralFormalOntology(GFO):Afoun-
dational ontology for conceptual modelling. In The-
ory and Applications of Ontology: Computer Appli-
cations, chapter 14, pages 297–345. Springer.
Hertling, S. (2012). Hertuda results for OEAI 2012. In Sev-
enth International Workshop on Ontology Matching
(OM’12), volume 946 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings. CEUR-WS.org.
Jim´enez-Ruiz, E. and Cuenca Grau, B. (2011). LogMap:
Logic-based and scalable ontology matching. In 10th
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC’11),
volume 7031 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 273–288. Springer.
Keet, C. M. (2012). Detecting and revising ﬂaws in OWL
object property expressions. In ten Teije et al., A., ed-
itor, 18thInternational Conferenceon KnowledgeEn-
gineering and Knowledge Management (EKAW’12),
volume 7603 of Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, pages 252–266. Springer. Oct 8-12, Galway,
Ireland.
Khan,Z.andKeet,C.M.(2012). ONSET:Automatedfoun-
dational ontology selection and explanation. In ten
Teije et al., A., editor, 18th International Conference
on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Manage-
ment (EKAW’12), volume 7603 of Lecture Notes in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 237–251. Springer. Oct
8-12, Galway, Ireland.
Khan, Z. and Keet, C. M. (2013). Toward semantic in-
teroperability with aligned foundational ontologies in
ROMULUS. In Seventh International Conference on
Knowledge Capture (K-CAP’13). ACM proceedings.
23-26 June, Banff, Canada. (poster/demo, in press).
Kolli, R. and Doshi, P. (2008). OPTIMA: tool for ontology
alignment with application to semantic reconciliation
of sensor metadata for publication in SensorMap. In
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Comput-
ing (ICSC’08), pages 484–485. IEEE. 4-7 Aug. 2008,
Santa Clara, CA, USA.
Masolo, C., Borgo, S., Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., and
Oltramari, A. (2003). Ontology library. Won-
derWeb Deliverable D18 (ver. 1.0, 31-12-2003).
http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org.
Mizoguchi, R. (2010). YAMATO: yet another more ad-
vanced top-level ontology. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Australasian Ontology Workshop, Conferences in Re-
search and Practice in Information, pages 1–16. Syd-
ney : ACS.
Ngo, D. and Bellahsene, Z. (2012). YAM++ : A multi-
strategy based approach for ontology matching task.
In ten Teije et al., A., editor, 18th International
Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowl-
edge Management (EKAW’12), volume 7603 of Lec-
ture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 421–425.
Springer. Oct 8-12, Galway, Ireland. Demo.
Niles, I. and Pease, A. (2001). Towards a standard upper
ontology. In Second International Conference on For-
mal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS’01). IOS
Press. Ogunquit, Maine, October 17-19, 2001.
Noy, N. F. and Musen, M. A. (2000). PROMPT: Al-
gorithm and tool for automated ontology merging
and alignment. In Seventeenth National Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Twelfth Conference on
on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI/IAAI), pages 450–455. AAAI Press.
Seyed, A. P. (2009). BFO/DOLCE primitive relation com-
parison. In The 12th Annual Bio-Ontologies Meeting
Colocated with Intelligent Systems for Molecular Bi-
ology (ISMB’09). Stockholm, Sweden, 28 June 2009.
Smith, B., Ceusters, W., Klagges, B., Kohler, J., Kumar, A.,
Lomax, J., Mungall, C., Neuhaus, F., Rector, A., and
Rosse, C. (2005). Relations in biomedical ontologies.
Genome Biology, 6(5):46.
Temal, L., Rosier, A., Dameron, O., and Burgun, A. (2010).
Mapping BFO and DOLCE. Studies in Health Tech-
nology and Informatics, 160(Pt 2):1065–9.