Aalborg Universitet
A design space for RDF data representations
Sagi, Tomer; Lissandrini, Matteo; Pedersen, Torben Bach; Hose, Katja
Published in:
The VLDB Journal
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1007/s00778-021-00725-x
Creative Commons License
CC BY 4.0
Publication date:
2022
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication from Aalborg University
Citation for published version (APA):
Sagi, T., Lissandrini, M., Pedersen, T. B., & Hose, K. (2022). A design space for RDF data representations. The
VLDB Journal, 31(2), 347-373. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00778-021-00725-x
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
- Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
- You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
- You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal -
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: May 13, 2026

TheVLDBJournal(2022)31:347–373
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00778-021-00725-x
SPECIAL ISSUE PAPER
AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations
Tomer Sagi1 ·Matteo Lissandrini1 ·Torben Bach Pedersen1 ·Katja Hose1
Received:31August2020/Revised:8September2021/Accepted:9December2021/Publishedonline:21January2022
©TheAuthor(s)2022
Abstract
RDFtriplestores’abilitytostoreandqueryknowledgebasesaugmentedwithsemanticannotationshasattractedtheattention
of both research and industry. A multitude of systems offer varying data representation and indexing schemes. However,
as recently shown for designing data structures, many design choices are biased by outdated considerations and may not
result in the most efﬁcient data representation for a given query workload. To overcome this limitation, we identify a novel
three-dimensional design space. Within this design space, we map the trade-offs between different RDF data representations
employed as part of an RDF triplestore and identify unexplored solutions. We complement the review with an empirical
evaluation of ten standard SPARQL benchmarks to examine the prevalence of these access patterns in synthetic and real
query workloads. We ﬁnd some access patterns, to be both prevalent in the workloads and under-supported by existing
triplestores. This shows the capabilities of our model to be used by RDF store designers to reason about different design
choices and allow a (possibly artiﬁcially intelligent) designer to evaluate the ﬁt between a given system design and a query
workload.
Keywords RDF · Data representation · SPARQL · Database · Query · Knowledge graphs
1 Introduction
Theresourcedescriptionframework(RDF)[44]isapopular
standard for storing and sharing factual information, pre-
dominantly created from sources on the World Wide Web.
RDF is represented as subject–predicate–object triples, usu-
ally modeled as a graph, whose nodes serve as subjects and
objects and edges as predicates. RDF stores, often called
triplestores, are designed to support the storage of RDF data
anditsefﬁcientqueryingbyexposingadeclarativequeryAPI
standardizedintheSPARQLstandard[63].Interestintriple-
stores has grown steadily over the past decade. In particular,
both research and industry are employing these systems to
store and query knowledge bases augmented with semantic
B Tomer Sagi
tsagi@cs.aau.dk
Matteo Lissandrini
matteo@cs.aau.dk
Torben Bach Pedersen
tbp@cs.aau.dk
Katja Hose
khose@cs.aau.dk
1 Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University,
Aalborg, Denmark
annotations [59,85]. Thus, a multitude of triplestore imple-
mentations are available, ranging from academic prototypes
(e.g.,RDF-3X[55],Hexastore[81])andcommunityprojects
(e.g.,JENATDB[58],andRya[64])tocommercialproducts
(e.g., Virtuoso [24], GraphDB [57], and Neptune [13]).
RDF data differs from relational data in the complexity
of its structure. In practice, real-life RDF datasets are highly
heterogeneousinstructure,especiallycomparedtorelational
datasets[22].Thisstructuralcomplexitycausesqueryperfor-
mance to vary substantially [3]. Converting RDF data to the
relational model, utilizing existing, mature, RDBMS tech-
nologies (e.g., by Oracle [20] and IBM [17]), introduces
unique challenges due to the substantial information hetero-
geneity and the inherent absence of a strict schema [67].
Together with the need to accommodate increasingly large
RDF graphs, these unique properties of RDF data have led
researchers and companies to suggest RDF-speciﬁc designs
rather than just mappings from RDF to relational formats.
Reviewing the features of the numerous available systems
reveals each to employ its own list of design choices each
of which seem equally compelling to the casual observer.
Recently, a different set of systems has been proposed to
handle graph data represented as node and edge labeled
multigraphs annotated with properties, i.e., property graphs
123

348 T.Sagietal.
(PG) [14]. Despite the fact that both the RDF model and the
PG model handle graph-shaped data, the two models dif-
fer substantially in terms of the functionalities they offer.
In particular, while RDF represents data as a set of triples,
PG DBMS are designed to query labeled objects annotated
with properties in the form of key-value pairs. Therefore,
theanalysisofcoreoperationssupportedbytriplestoressub-
stantially differs from those supported by PG DBMS. (This
canbeseen,forinstance,bycomparingouranalysiswiththe
operations studied in a recent PG DBMS microbenchmark
[47].) For instance, in a PG, we can select nodes having a
speciﬁc label and a speciﬁc attribute set to a speciﬁc type
accessing only node objects, while in an RDF triplestore an
equivalent query will need to query a set of triples instead.
Although there are several surveys of the many existing
triplestores [2,52,56,59], they are either limited to providing
a taxonomy of the features offered by the systems (e.g., API
and data load facilities) or classify them according to their
underlying technology (e.g., relational versus native graph).
Thus, these surveys offer a vast compendium of alternative
systemsbutonlylittleinformationregardingthedesignspace
in which their internal architecture reside.
Instead, in this work, we provide a unifying three-
dimensional design space across three axes: Subdivision,
Compression,andRedundancy(SCR,seeFig.4).Thedesign
spacedeﬁnesthedimensionsalongwhichanystoragesystem
forRDFdata mustbe designed. We then provide a review of
the current choices made over these dimensions as well as
a discussion into unexplored options. To guide the analysis
of this space and of current solutions within it, we deﬁne a
corresponding feature space for query access patterns1 and
acostmodeltotiethedifferentchoicesinthedesignspaceto
theirimpactontheperformanceofspeciﬁcqueryworkloads.
Our approach is, in part, inspired by the Data Calcu-
lator [41]. However, while the Data Calculator focuses on
optimizing a single low-level data structure for generic (i.e.,
non-SPARQL-speciﬁc)dataaccessoperations,ourapproach
works at a higher level and focuses on evaluating the set of
data representations employed by a triplestore; choosing the
right design choices to match the RDF access patterns this
system must support. Thus, a triplestore system developer
could use our approach to identify access patterns that are
currently not optimized for by the data representations in
their triplestore. For example, the Jena (TDB) system [58]
does not feature any optimized data representation for ﬁl-
ters selecting triples involving a speciﬁc data type or with a
speciﬁclanguagetag,eventhoughtheyarequitecommonin
1 Here,werefertoaccesspatternsaslogicaloperationsinaquerythat,
given some input values, establish what kind of output values must be
returned. The difference from the use of the term access patterns in the
relational model [27] and from the term access paths [72] is described
in Sect. 3.
existingworkloads(seeSect.7).Thisisevidentfromanalyz-
ing Jena’s existing data representations using our proposed
designspace(seeTables5,6,and7).Oncethedeveloperhas
identiﬁed this unmet pattern, they can examine which com-
bination of decisions is available in the three design space
dimensions they wish to employ to satisfy this new pattern.
In this example, one possible solution would be to employ
an additional subdivision of the existing ID space to differ-
entiate between data types and languages. This can lead to
a different data organization within an existing index or to a
newaccess-pattern-speciﬁcindex.(Inthiscasewealsomove
withintheredundancydimension.)SincetheDataCalculator
is not aware of the presence of annotations such as language
tagsandthepossibilitytorepresentthemseparatelybysubdi-
viding the ID space, it cannot identify this unmet need and it
cannot provide an optimized solution for this access pattern.
Similarly, the Data Calculator is not aware of other RDF-
speciﬁc access patterns, e.g., reachability and path queries.
Moreover, Jena employs three different main triple data rep-
resentationsbasedonstandardB+treesandidenticalinallthe
low-level features considered by the Data Calculator. In the
proposed access patterns feature space, we provide a way to
differentiate between the RDF-speciﬁc access patterns each
of these representations is required to support. Thus, we are
able to evaluate and assess the compatibility of a set of data
representationsusedinatriplestorewithRDF-speciﬁcaccess
patterns.
Our design space is based on intuitions widely shared
acrossdifferentdatamodelsandtheirDBMS[10].However,
these intuitions have not been formalized for RDF systems
and existing RDF systems have not been analyzed based on
them. We thereby make the following contributions.
1. A design space for RDF data representations employed
in a triplestore that is simple enough to be intuitive, yet,
as we show, powerful enough to analyze the beneﬁts and
trade-offs of each design choice.
2. A review of existing triplestores positioning them in this
design space and identifying unexplored choices.
3. AfeaturespaceforSPARQLqueryaccesspatternsallow-
ing to characterize query execution over RDF.
4. Asoftwaretooltoparsequeryworkloadsandanalyzethe
patterns used.
5. A comprehensive analysis of how design choices impact
systemperformancewhenansweringaccesspatternswith
speciﬁc features.
6. An empirical evaluation of the prevalence of access pat-
terns in commonly used query workloads.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2
providespreliminarydeﬁnitionsfollowedbythequeryaccess
patternfeaturespaceinSect.3.Wethenintroduceourdesign
space in Sect. 4, followed by the review of existing systems
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 349
Fig.1 Example of RDF data in graph format
(Sect. 5). Section 6 presents our impact analysis, distilling
important ﬁndings obtained by the analysis of the systems
design in our design space. This analysis is followed by the
empirical evaluation in Sect. 7. Finally, we highlight the dif-
ferences between this work and previous surveys in Sect. 8
and conclude by discussing the implications of our analysis
and ﬁndings in Sect. 9.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we formally deﬁne the basic concepts of
RDF graphs and RDF graph patterns. Both revolve around
the concept of RDF triples [44]. An RDF triple is a factual
statement comprised of a subject (s), a predicate (p), and an
object(o).Subjectsandobjectscanberesourcesidentiﬁedby
International Resource Identiﬁers (IRI), anonymous nodes
identiﬁed by internal IDs (called blank nodes), or literals.
PredicatesarealwaysIRIs(resources)andneverliterals[62].
For example, the triple (ex:iri1, rdfs:label, "Human") states
thattheresourceidentiﬁedbytheIRIex:iri1hasanrdfs:label
which istheliteralstring"Human". Collectively, nodes (i.e.,
resources, blank nodes, and literals) can be referred to as
atoms. RDF allows to explicitly record knowledge codiﬁed
as a graph where subjects and predicates serve as nodes and
triples as edges.
Deﬁnition1 (RDF Triple/Statement & Graph) Given a set
of IRIs I, blank nodes B, and literals L, a triple (s, p,o) ∈
(I ∪B)×(I)×(I ∪B ∪L) is called an RDF triple. In the
(s, p,o)triple,alsocalledanRDFstatement,s isthesubject,
p is the predicate, and o is the object. An RDF graph G is a
set of RDF triples.
Example1 ConsiderthegraphinFig.1,whichisagraphical
representation of a set of triples. In this case, ex:iri1,
ex:iri3, rdfs:label, and ex:Sex are examples of
IRIs in I, the ﬁrst two with the role of nodes and the second
two with the role of predicates. On the other hand, "11M"
and 2018 are literals in L. Finally, (ex:iri1, ex:Sex,
ex:iri3) is an (s, p, o) triple.
AnRDFgraphisqueriedbyissuingaSPARQL[63]query
toanevaluationengine,calledatriplestore,whosecorefunc-
tionalityistocomputeanswersbasedonthegraphstructures
matching it. SPARQL queries contain one or more basic
graph patterns, which are sets of triples with zero or more
of their components replaced by variables, formally deﬁned
as follows.
Deﬁnition2 (Basic Graph Pattern [62]) Assume an inﬁnite
countable set of variables X. A Basic Graph Pattern (BGP)
P is deﬁned as a conjunction of a ﬁnite set of triple patterns
P = {t1,...,tn}, with ti ∈ P being a triple pattern deﬁned
as ti∈(I∪X)×(I ∪ X)×(I∪L∪X).
Thus,triplepatternsare(s, p,o)tripleswhereanyposition
may be replaced by a variable. Solutions to the variables are
foundbymatchingthetriplepatternsintheBGPwithtriples
in the RDF graph.
Moreover, there are special types of patterns that match
sequences of edges satisfying a speciﬁc set of predi-
cates, e.g., all nodes reachable by an arbitrary sequence of
ex:childOfpredicates.Thesepatternsarecalledproperty
paths.Theyaredeﬁnedviaaspecializedformofexpressions
called path expressions (similar to regular expressions) and
offer a succinct way to write parts of basic graph patterns
andalsoextendmatchingoftriplepatternstoarbitrarylength
paths [35].
Deﬁnition3 (Property paths [35]) SPARQL 1.1 deﬁnes a
property path p recursively as follows. A property path is
(1) any resource a∈I; (2) given property paths p1 and p2,
a property path is either a sequence of paths denoted by
p1/p2, a disjunction paths denoted by p1|p2, a negation of
a path denoted by ˆp1, a sequence of zero or more of the
same path denoted by p1∗, a sequence of one or more rep-
etitions of the same path denoted by p1+, or either zero or
one occurrences of the path denoted by p1?; alternatively
(3) given resources a1,...,an∈I, then any of the follow-
ing expressions !a1,!∧a1 !(a1|...|an), !(∧a1|...|∧an
) and
!
(
a1|...|aj
∣∣∧ aj+1|...|∧an
)
where ! denotes negation, ∧
denotes inversion and | denotes disjunction.
Hence, property paths are expressions over vocabulary
I of all IRIs [86]. The language does not allow to express
negated property paths, but it is possible to express negation
on IRIs, inverted IRIs and disjunctions of combinations of
IRIs and inverted IRIs. A property path triple is a tuple t of
the form (s,p,o), where s,o∈(I∪X) and p is a property
123

350 T.Sagietal.
path. Such a triple is a graph pattern that matches all pairs
of nodes 〈s,o〉 in an RDF graph that are connected by paths
that conform to p.
In its simplest form, a SPARQL query has the form
“SELECT V WHERE P”, with P = {t1,... ,tn} being a set
of triple patterns (BGP). Optionally, one or more FILTER
clauses further constrain the variables in P. Let XP denote
the ﬁnite set of variables occurring in P, i.e., XP ⊂ X
[63], then V is the vector of variables returned by the query
such that V ⊆ XP . Additional operators such as UNION
or OPTIONAL allow more than one BGP in a query by
deﬁningthenon-conjunctivesemanticsoftheircombination.
Finally, SPARQL queries can also make use of GROUP BY
and aggregate operators.
SPARQLqueriesaredeclarativeandarethereforedesigned
tobedecoupledfromthephysicaldataaccessmethods2 used
to retrieve the data. This decoupling allows speciﬁc triple-
store implementations to use different data representations
andqueryprocessingdesignstodynamicallymatchanappro-
priate execution plan with a given query. Furthermore, when
answeringaquery,asingleBGPcanbedecomposedintosev-
eral component BGPs and subsequently recombined before
or after each BGP is solved.
SPARQL queries, as traditional queries, can also specify
howtochangethecontentofthegraph.Inthiscase,thequery
can either list a set of new RDF triples to be inserted into the
graph or a set of triples to be deleted from the graph.
3 Accesspatterns
TodesignaperformantRDFtriplestore,itisofcrucialimpor-
tance not only to understand the type of information that it
will store but also how this information will be queried, i.e.,
theexpectedqueryworkload.Speciﬁcally,SPARQLqueries,
decomposed into BGPs and their associated triple patterns,
access the data representation in different ways. In this sec-
tion,wedescribehowSPARQLqueriesandtheirconstituent
BGPs can be analyzed to identify standard access patterns.
Deﬁnition4 (Access Pattern) An access pattern is the set of
logical operations that, given a set of variable bindings over
a graph, determine what data to access (and optionally to
change) and what output to produce.
Notethatthetermisuseddifferentlybyrelationalmodel[27]
analyses, where, given a relation, it only refers to what data
is required as input and what tuples of the relation to pro-
duce as output. Moreover, this concept also differs from the
concept of access paths, which refers instead to alternative
datastructuresthatcanbenavigatedtoreachthedesireddata
2 Access methods are low-level algorithms and data structures for
organizing and accessing data [37].
[72].Theneedforsatisfyingtherequirementsoftheseaccess
patterns guides the selection and design of appropriate data
representationsalongthedesignspacedimensionsdeﬁnedin
the following section.
Given a query and a speciﬁc BGP from the query, the
access pattern is determined by the triple patterns in the
BGP and any additional operators assigned to it from the
SPARQLquery,e.g.,ﬁlters,grouping,oraggregations.Here,
we identify the feature space of access patterns (summa-
rized in Table 1). This feature space is comprised of six
dimensions (each dimension containing a set of alternative
features), namely:
– Constants the presence of constant values (as opposed
to variables which have bindings).
– Filter The presence (or absence) of a ﬁlter on a range of
values.
– Traversal The complexity and type of the traversal
described by different triple patterns of the BGP.
– Pivot HowdifferenttriplepatternsoftheBGParelinked
together by some common atom in the BGP (here called
a pivot).
– Return The information expected to be returned.
– Write Whether and how the BGP causes a change in the
contents of the database.
Constants A common feature of any BGP is the pres-
ence of variables in one or more of the subject (s), predicate
(p), or object (o) positions (see Deﬁnition 2). The presence
of a variable requires ﬁnding all the triples that match the
remaining (non-variable, hence constant) positions. There-
fore,sincethetriplestoremustﬁndalltriplesthatcontainthe
same constants in those positions, their presence in the BGP
provides higher selectivity that can be exploited by ﬁlter-
ing and indexing schemes. In particular, a triple pattern that
is fully instantiated translates into an existence clause for a
single speciﬁc triple. Partially instantiated BGPs are those
where some of the (s, p, o) positions are expressed as vari-
ables.Finally,whenallthree(s, p,o)positionsarevariables,
we have an uninstantiated access pattern which matches all
the triples in the database.
Filter Filters with conditions limiting the values that can
be bound to one or more variables within a speciﬁc subset.
Since ﬁlter operators have proper semantics deﬁned for lit-
erals, and since literals can only appear as objects in a triple,
ﬁlter operators retain triples based on the value assumed by
a variable in the object position. Filter operations usually
deﬁneopenintervals(e.g.,?o > 10),butwhencombinedthe
query engine can translate them into closed intervals (e.g.,
10 >?o > 100). Moreover, for SPARQL, a special type of
ﬁlters depends on the type of the object. In practice, a query
could return only values that are all literals or all IRIs, or all
blank nodes, i.e., a ﬁlter based on their membership to L, I,
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 351
Table1 Feature space of access patterns for a SPARQL query
or B. For this purpose, SPARQL has special native opera-
tors isLiteral, isBlank, and isURI. Similarly, RDF
literal strings can be annotated with language tags allowing
a query to ﬁlter based on those tags. For instance, to distin-
guish that the string “Rome” is in French and not in English,
RDF represents it as "Rome"@fr instead of "Rome"@en.
Hence, a query could select only strings marked as @fr.
TraversalTraversaltypesdeterminethenumberoftriples
thatneedtobetraversedorconsidered,substantiallyimpact-
ing the query’s complexity. We identify three cases, namely
(i) 1-hop traversal s→o for a given speciﬁc predicate p; (ii)
k-hops for a given sequence of predicates p1,..., pk; and
(iii) a path for an unconstrained number of hops over some
predicate p.Excludingthesimple1-hop,theothertraversals
are usually expressed by (and referred to as) property paths
[62].Inallcases,atraversalcangoineitherdirection(givena
source,ﬁndtargets,orgivenatarget,ﬁndallsources).More-
over, in traversals with more than one hop, the intermediate
nodes are not required to be returned.
Pivot Related to traversals, an essential feature of a BGP
istheabilitytoconnectmultipletriplepatternsinotherstruc-
tural forms than a sequence. When an atom appears in two
or more different triple patterns of the BGP, we refer to it
as a pivot. We note that the pivot can appear in the same
position, e.g., always in the subject position, or in differ-
ent positions, e.g., subject of one triple pattern and object
in another. This feature effectively determines the topology
of the graph structure described by the query and can serve
as the building block for more complex structures such as
stars and snow-ﬂakes [16]. We use the term pivot and not
join to separate between the access pattern required (pivot)
and its physical instantiation (e.g., a join operation), which
is dependent on the data representation. Some speciﬁc data
representationscanspeeduppivotoperations,avoidingrela-
tional table join-type operations altogether. In particular, we
distinguishbetweenapivotinvolvingonlytwotriplepatterns
and a pivot where the same variable is shared between more
thantwotriplepatterns,e.g.,inastarpattern[77].Inthelatter
case, recent studies have shown the advantage in employing
worst-caseoptimaljoinalgorithms[38]wheremultipletriple
patterns sharing a pivot can be evaluated altogether. More-
over,whileapivotovertheobjectofonetripleandthesubject
of another can be seen as a 2-hop traversal, in general, one
cannotcategoricallysaythatusingtwopivotsisbetterthana
2-hopreachabilityindex.Thus,inouranalysis,thesefeatures
are considered separately.
Return The solution to a SPARQL query is the set (or a
subset) of the bindings of atoms (from the matching triples)
tosomevariables.GivenaBGP,mostqueriesreturnallvari-
ablebindingsthatmatchthetriplepattern.Yet,inothercases
not all matching triples and variable bindings are directly
returned in the query result. When only a subset of the vari-
ables are returned, this may cause duplicate values to be
returned, representing all of the triples found to match the
BGP. We name this case Values (all) since the query returns
values and all duplicates are returned (Table 1). When the
DISTINCT keyword is used, only the set of distinct bind-
ings for each variable is required. This case is named Values
(distinct).Moreover,somequeriescouldrequirethebindings
for some variable to be returned in some predeﬁned order.
We refer to this case as Values (sorted). For some queries,
it is sufﬁcient to identify whether a variable binding exists
satisfying the pattern, but we are not required to return the
binding. In some other cases, a query just needs to verify
whether a speciﬁc path exists or vice versa; when a speciﬁc
connectiondoesnotexist,thisisalsoaddressedbyanegation
onanexistencecheck.SPARQL ASKqueriesareanextreme
example where the entire query returns no variable bindings
but only the value true (exists) or false (does not exists) for
a speciﬁc BGP. Finally, a query could be required to return
aggregated values, i.e., the count of matchings for a BGP or
max and min values for literals bindings.
Write SPARQL allows not only to retrieve information
from the database but also to modify its contents, i.e., write
operations. Note that update operations are often unsup-
ported, requiring a deletion and subsequent insertion of new
123

352 T.Sagietal.
Fig.2 SPARQL query with annotated access patterns
triples instead. We consider these access patterns to dis-
tinguish the case of read-only workloads from read-write
workloads.
Example query analysis Consider the example in Fig. 2
(from a WikiData query log [16]) retrieving location coor-
dinates of archaeological sites. Property path wdt:P31/
wdt:P279* wd:Q1190554 is of the form p1 / p2*
o, meaning that it would match two alternative paths: (1)
1-hop traversals over p1 = wdt:P31 reaching the target
node o=wd:Q1190554 directly, and (2) *-hop traversals
startingwithoneedgefor wdt:P31andreachingtheobject
throughasequenceofarbitrarilylongpathsmatchingthep2
= wdt:P279 triple pattern. Hence, the query contains two
1-hop traversals (marked with stars, one in each direction,
since wdt:P279* is optional) and a composite property
path(wdt:P31/wdt:P279*,seeDeﬁnition3).Itcontains
atriplepatternwithconstantsinboth(p)and(o)(highlighted
in dashed blue) and two triple patterns with a constant only
in (p) (in solid blue). Moreover, the query contains both a
closed range ﬁlter and two different special ﬁlters: one for
the DATATYPE and one for the LANG property of literals.
Finally, the ?event variable is a 3-way pivot, which can
also be executed as a set of binary s ≡ s pivot access pat-
terns.
Therefore,thisfeaturespaceallowsustocharacterizeeach
querywiththerequirementsofthecorrespondingaccesspat-
ternsneededtoanswerit.Inthefollowing,wedeﬁneadesign
space for data representations. Decisions for the different
dimensions within the design space impact how efﬁciently
thequery’saccesspatternsaresupportedbytheresultingdata
representations.
4 AdesignspaceforRDFdata
representations
Triplestores implement a set of data representations that
support the data access patterns needed to solve the BGPs
as described in the previous section. A data representation
stores a subset of the graph G⊆G. Given an access pattern
comprised of a BGP P, a vector of variables to return V,
and optionally ﬁlter and aggregation operations over these
variables O,adatarepresentationtoanswerthegivenaccess
pattern needs to provide a way to retrieve the values of V
fromtheinformationstoredinG ortomodifyG accordingly
to V. Therefore, given an access pattern A and a data repre-
sentation D, if D holds the information necessary to answer
the access pattern A, we want to evaluate the performance
of D to provide the correct instantiations of V given P and
O. Thus, the question is what is the cost, in terms of time,
neededtocomputetheinstantiationsofVandexecuteAover
D.Answeringsuchaquestionallows,giventwodistinctdata
representations, to select the most appropriate one.
In this section, we begin by deﬁning a basic cost model
(Sect. 4.1) and the notion of compatibility between access
patterns and data representations (Sect. 4.2). Then, we pro-
pose a design space for data representations over which
design decisions can be made (Sect. 4.3). Together, these
allow the evaluation of ﬁt between an access pattern and a
design choice which is later showcased in Sect. 6.
4.1 Costmodel
ToansweraBGPusingaparticulardatarepresentationincurs
a cost usually expressed in terms of the time it takes to
retrieve all such answers. Estimating this cost for the differ-
ent access patterns is crucial, both at design time and during
queryprocessing,andreliesonacostmodelassigningacost
to each type of basic operation. Several such models have
beenproposedforRDF[21,29,66],butwerebiasedbyasim-
pletwo-tieredmemoryhierarchyandunderlyingarelational
data representation. In an era of shared memory clusters,
large-RAM machines, SSD, NVRAM, SIMD, and vector-
ized processing (e.g., [51]), assuming a single cost relation
paradigm is no longer sensible.
What still holds true over all novel (existing or future)
machine architectures and memory types is the fact that ran-
dom seek operations incur a different cost than sequential
read operations. As echoed by the authors of the RUM con-
jecture [9], “.. in the 1970s one of the critical aspects of
every database algorithm was to minimize the number of
randomaccessesondisk;fast-forward40yearsandasimilar
strategy is still used, only now we minimize the number of
randomaccessestomainmemory”.Theuseofcompression
to minimize memory requirements and speedup retrieval of
large result sets incurs additional costs in compression and
decompressiontimes.Althoughnovelcompressionmethods
utilizing hardware to speedup these times are increasingly
available(e.g.,[6]),thereremainsadifferencebetweencom-
pressed and uncompressed data. We, therefore, follow the
recentconventionofemployingasetofcostconstants[12,41]
differentiating between random and sequential and between
compressed and uncompressed costs. The instantiation of
theseconstantsforthedifferentrepresentationoptionsonthe
current hardware can be done at design time by measuring
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 353
operation times on the current conﬁguration. We use these
constants to induce a ranking over different representations
in the same design space dimension.
Deﬁnition5 (BasicOperationCostConstants)Readrandom
(Rr) represents the average cost of accessing a random sin-
gle data item (e.g., a key or a value) in a data representation
given a pointer to the item. Read sequential (Rs), instead,
measures the cost of reading a data item stored in a position
succeeding the current one, i.e., stored sequentially within a
contiguousregionofmemory(e.g.,thenextblockondisk,or
the next position in an array). For compressed data, we dis-
tinguishbetweenreadcompressedsequential (Rcs)andread
uncompressed sequential (Rus). Similarly deﬁned constants
forwriteoperationsare Wr, Ws , Wcs,and Wus,respectively.
4.2 Datarepresentationcompatibility
To assess whether a data representation can efﬁciently sup-
port a speciﬁc access pattern, we deﬁne the notion of
compatibility.3 Therefore, given an access pattern A and
a data representation D able to answer A, we assume that
there is a sequence of operations speciﬁed by an algorithm
Γ deﬁned over D that can compute such an answer S, i.e.,
S = Γ(A,D).Thenumberandcostoftheseoperationsspec-
iﬁed by Γ directly determine whether D is a representation
suitable for computing efﬁciently the answers to A. When
measuring the number of operations required to be executed
over D, we distinguish between random seek and sequential
operations.4 Inparticular,anRDFdatarepresentationcanbe
seek compatible or sequence compatible, deﬁned as follows.
A data representation is seek compatible with an access
pattern if one or more of the results required by the access
pattern can be retrieved in a single random access step. For
example, if the access pattern requires retrieving the objects
that are related to the same subject s1 via the same predicate
p1, i.e., 〈s1, p1, ?o〉, a seek compatible representation is
one that, given the pair of values 〈s1, p1〉, returns a pointer
to the ﬁrst element of this set (e.g., a hash table).
A representation is sequence compatible if all results
required by the access pattern can be retrieved through
sequential accesses without requiring (after the initial seek)
any additional random seek to complete the result set. In the
case of a hash table for 〈s1, p1, ?o〉, if the pointer returned
from the ﬁrst seek is to a contiguous area of memory/disk
3 We deﬁne this notion for read operations only under the assumption
that a read operation is required before deletion (to locate the data to
be deleted) and before insertion (to locate where to insert the data and
to avoid duplicates) and is therefore required for every type of access
pattern. Following such a read operation, the set of pointers returned
can be used to perform an update, deletion, or insertion.
4 In the following, for ease of presentation, we refer to a simpliﬁed
cost model where we consider the amortized average cost of the data
structures, e.g., hash maps access methods have average constant cost.
containing all objects satisfying the access pattern, the rep-
resentation is sequence compatible. However, if the objects
are stored in a linked list, requiring additional random seeks
toread,therepresentationisnotsequencecompatible.More-
over,wesaythatarepresentationisselectioncompatiblewith
an access pattern if no unneeded results are retrieved. For
example, if a variable ?o in our example is restricted to liter-
als (with isLiteral), then any triple with a IRI as object
is unneeded.
Deﬁnition6 (Compatibility) Let A be an access pattern and
letS bethesetofresultsthataretheanswertoAoveragraph
G.LetDbeadatarepresentationofG.S isa,possiblyempty,
set of tuples containing any combination of literals, blank
nodes, and IRIs. Then, Cr1(A|D) is the number of random
seek operations required to reach the ﬁrst result of S in D
or to ascertain that S ≡ ∅. We deﬁne CrΩ(A|D) to be the
cost in terms of number of random seek operations required
to retrieve all results in S from D after having reached the
ﬁrstresultinS.Correspondingly,CsΩ(A|D)isthenumberof
sequentialreadoperationsrequiredtoretrieveallsubsequent
results. Hence, the total cost to retrieve the results S of A
over D is:
Cr1(A|D)×Rr +CrΩ(A|D)×Rr +CsΩ(A|D)×Rs. (1)
Hence, we say that a data representation D is:
– seek compatible with A if Cr1(A|D) = ε, where ε∈R+
issomesmallsystem-dependentconstantindependentof
|G| (e.g., if D is a hash-table the ﬁxed cost to search
elements in D is usually approximated to the constant
1.2).
– sequence compatible with A if S can be sequentially
retrieved after the initial seek, that is CrΩ(A|D) = 0 and
CsΩ(A|D) ≤ max(|G|,|S|).
– selection compatible with A if no excess results are
retrieved, that is CrΩ(A|D) +CsΩ(A|D) ≤ |S|.
Example2 (Compatibility of different representations) For
instance, one way to store G is to represent each triple as
a 3-tuple, and the entire dataset as a list of 3-tuples sorted
by subject and then by predicate and object (Fig. 3a and d
below) with a clustered B+ tree index over them. In this rep-
resentation,thecostofqueryprocessingwouldresemblethat
of a relational table with three attributes (s, p, o), all part of
a primary index. This representation is sequence compatible
with any 1-hop access pattern that binds s, both s and p,
or all three positions. That is, the algorithm Γ(〈s1, p1, ?o〉,
sorted(G);B+ tree) would ﬁrst ﬁnd the ﬁrst tuple perform-
ing log(G) steps traversing the B+ tree looking for s1, p1
and then perform a linear scan over the ﬁle to retrieve the
remaining tuples. However, the B+ tree is not seek compat-
123

354 T.Sagietal.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Fig.3 Examples of data representations: a sorted ﬁle, b hash map, c property table, and d B+ tree
Fig.4 The SCR system design space for RDF stores
ible, because the time to ﬁnd the ﬁrst result depends on the
size of the graph, i.e.,it involveslog(|G|)seek operations to
reach the ﬁrst result.
A different data representation is to employ a key-value
data structure (similar to Fig. 3b) and use the pair subject-
predicate as the key, and the object as the value. In this data
structure, triples sharing the same s and p will store the
list of objects contiguously. This data structure is both seek
and sequence compatible for a traversal that, given s and p,
retrieves all corresponding objects. Nevertheless, this repre-
sentationisneitherseekcompatiblenorsequencecompatible
if the query requires all edges for predicate p regardless of
s.
In the following, we present a design space within which
each data representation can be embedded. The deﬁnitions
of cost and compatibility presented above allow to analyze
theadvantagesanddrawbacksofthedifferentchoicesineach
dimension of the design space.
4.3 Thedesignspacedimensions
When designing data representations for an RDF store, one
can model thedesign decisions over threeaxes: Subdivision,
Compression, and Redundancy (SCR, Fig. 4). Each of these
orthogonalaxes,whosepropertiesaresummarizedinTable2,
represents a continuum along which a system can be posi-
tioned.
Subdivision The subdivision axis determines how frag-
mented the data is. At one extreme, all data is stored
contiguously in a single structure; at the other extreme, each
edgeandnodeisstoredasaseparateobjectwithpointerstoits
neighborsintheinduced graph.Inbetween therearevarious
datastructuressuchasB+treesorhashmapsadaptedtothese
settings. This axis contains design decisions such as sorting,
grouping, and hashing. Each of these decisions creates an
additional subdivision in the data. Increasing the extent of
subdivision allows us to minimize the number of unneeded
data items accessed to answer an access pattern (yielding
fewer Rs and Ws operations that return items not in S).
For example, when using the single ﬁle approach, we would
potentially need to read the entire ﬁle before ﬁnding a single
required triple, while with a hash table, we move directly to
theﬁrstmatchingtuple.Filteraccesspatternsonlargeranges
of values, however, can be costly when data representations
utilize extensive subdivision. The use of multi-core paral-
lelizedprocessingcanamelioratethiscost,tosomeextent,by
dividingthesequentialretrievaltasksamongcoresthataccess
the subdivided data in parallel. Subdivided data representa-
tions provide an additional beneﬁt for multi-core systems,
as they allow the creation of locking mechanisms with ﬁner
granularity,reducingwaittimes.ConsiderFig.3.Notethat,in
asortedﬁle(Fig.3a),thesortingkeysactasthesimplestsub-
division by collecting all triples of the same value together.
Ontheotherhand,withahashtable(Fig.3b),giventhetarget
IRI,thehashfunctionseparatedallrelevanttriplessharingthe
samekey.Notethateverytimewemoveacrosssubdivisions,
we move into a different non-contiguous region in either
diskormemory,increasingthe Rr cost.Therefore,decisions
across the subdivision axis easily determine whether a data
structureisselectioncompatible,i.e.,ifitboundsallandonly
the answers within a speciﬁc subdivision, but it also impact
random and sequence compatibility.
Compression The second axis is the compression axis.
The goal of compression is to minimize the number of bits
read to reach the ﬁrst tuple in the result set (Rr) and the
number of bits required to read and potentially store the
result set for further processing Rcs. The potentially nega-
tive impact of compression is, of course, the decompression
required to evaluate a predicate in the access pattern if the
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 355
Table2 Summary of data representation design space axes
access pattern is incompatible or partially incompatible. For
example, consider a compressed data representation tuned
for queries of the form (s, ?p, ?o) and s≡s access patterns
(e.g., BitMat [11]). Using this representation to answer an s
p∗/+ o pattern (i.e., is o reachable from s through a edges
labeled with p) would require a potentially large number
of row decompression operations to perform the o≡s pivot
operations required resolve the traversal. Since these may
be spread around the data structure, this would incur a large
number of Rr operations. Therefore, decisions across the
compression axis impact heavily the selection compatibility
when data that does not contribute to the answer are com-
pressed together with data relevant for an access pattern.
Redundancy Thethirdaxisistheredundancyaxiswhich
causes (redundant) copies of the data to be stored in the sys-
tem. By adding redundant data representations and indexes,
it is possible to deﬁne ideal (seek, sequence, and selec-
tioncompatible)datarepresentationsforeachaccesspattern.
However, this comes at the cost of having to store the same
informationmultipletimes.Forexample,byholdingbothan
SPO clustered index and a PSO clustered index, each triple
is stored twice. Thus, this hinders the compatibility with
write access patterns. Moreover, design decisions includ-
ing full/partial replication need to ﬁnd a trade-off between
storage space and efﬁcient support of query access patterns.
Hence, the cost of maintaining multiple representations is
threefold: (i) Increased latency for delete and insert opera-
tions(higherWr andWs)withpossiblyreducedperformance
of read operations (higher Rus) as well, since additional
(uncompressed)auxiliarydatastructuresarerequiredtostore
deltasuntilthecostofupdatingcanbeamortizedoveralarge
enough set of updates (e.g., as in RDF-3X [55]). The use of
multi-core parallelized processing can avoid this additional
cost, to some extent, by dividing the redundant update tasks
among cores in parallel, allowing for more rapid update of
the compressed structures. (ii) An increase in space require-
ments, subsequently straining the limited space in main
memory and causing an increase in all R costs. (iii) An
increaseinqueryoptimizationtimebecausealternativestruc-
tures to access the data result in a higher number of query
execution plans that have to be considered.
Example3 (SCR Space analysis.) To illustrate the connec-
tion between the SCR space and the proposed cost model,
consider again the different data representations in Fig. 3.
A sorted ﬁle (Fig. 3a) divides the triples (cardinality |G|)
by the values of the ﬁrst sort ﬁeld (e.g., s) and eventu-
ally by all remaining sort key ﬁelds. Finding the ﬁrst tuple
with some speciﬁc value for s requires log2(|G|) random
seeks.Subsequently,readingalltherelevantrecords(assum-
ing a cardinality of |S|) is now a sequential read. The
ﬁnal total cost for the Constant s access pattern is then
Rr×log2(|G|)+Rs×|S|.Hashtables(Fig.3b)improveupon
this, i.e., moves further along the Subdivision axis, by sub-
dividing the space into buckets with the same key value.
Then, all keys with the same value are divided into a linked
list of blocks of predeﬁned maximum size (k, with k = 1
in the ﬁgure). Therefore, this incurs a random seek cost to
reach the ﬁrst record and then sequentially read the whole
bucket,and(m=|S|/k)randomseekstomovefrombucket
to bucket, with a total cost of Rr×(1+m)+Rs×|S|. While
random seek costs often dominate sequential ones by orders
of magnitude, in the average case of small answer set S, this
additional subdivision improves read costs for this access
pattern. Deploying a B+ tree, instead, would keep the same
Subdivision, but move across the Redundancy axis.
WenowidentifytheseoptionsinexistingRDFtriplestores
and place them within the SCR space.
5 DatarepresentationsinRDFtriplestores
We now review a wide range of existing triplestores and
the data representations they employ within the SCR design
space. Here, we focus on centralized systems5 that have
either been published as research prototypes or commer-
cially available systems. Our inclusion principle is a system,
which allows the ingestion of RDF data and supports the
5 We speciﬁcally exclude distributed and cloud-based solutions as the
needfordistributingandreplicatingdatabetweennodesskewsthesys-
tem’scostmodelandisamostlyorthogonaldecisiontothatofchoosing
which core data representations to use. Some distributed systems (e.g.,
4-store [34] and Partout [30]), directly extend centralized systems.
123

356 T.Sagietal.
SPARQL query language (including insertions and dele-
tions). We exclude systems for which we could not ﬁnd
sufﬁciently detailed information regarding their data rep-
resentation. Notable commercial exclusions are, therefore,
Amazon Neptune [13], AllegroGraph [28], and StarDog
[74], which do not disclose their internals. Notable non-
commercial exclusions are HexaStore [81] and RDFBroker
[73], which do not support SPARQL, and KAON2 [78],
which is designed for OWL reasoning rather than SPARQL
answeringoverRDFtriples.Moreover,wealsoexcludeHDT
[25], which only supports data serialization.
Tables3and4summarizethefeaturesofthereviewedsys-
temsoverthedesignspacedimensions.Differenttriplestores
cannowbecomparedbasedonthechoicestheyhavemadeon
howtosubdividethedata(Subdivision),whetherandhowto
compress IDs, literals and triples (Compression), and which
redundantrepresentationstomaintain(Redundancy).Table3
listssystemsbasedonanunderlyingrelationaldatabasesys-
tem (RDBMS), and Table 4 lists systems using a native
graph storage. The year stated next to the system name rep-
resents the publication year of the latest paper or technical
report describing its features. It seems that recent solutions
favor a native storage mechanism over using an RDBMS.
Furthermore, the use of B+trees is becoming less preva-
lent,withrecentsolutionsfavoringhash-basedsolutions.We
now present a classiﬁcation of the systems into the different
choices in each dimension.
5.1 Subdivision
Table 5 summarizes the design choices over the subdivi-
sion dimension. Recall that subdivision aims to minimize
the number of unneeded items read when seeking and read-
ing. This minimization may come at the cost of increasing
the number of random seeks required to reach the data items
needed by the access pattern. Within the subdivision dimen-
sion, we identiﬁed four choices which system designers can
make: (1) how to subdivide the main triple data, (2) whether
and how to divide the ID space assigned to IRI/literals, (3)
how to subdivide the IRI/Literal→ID data representation,
and(4)howtosubdividethereverseID→IRIrepresentation.
Systems in the table are divided into four groups according
to their approach toward subdividing the main triple data.
The largest group of systems utilizes an underlying rela-
tional representation, either a column-based (SW-store [1])
or a row-based one (the rest). The 2nd-largest group utilizes
tree-basedrepresentations.WhileMulgara[54]usesanAVL
tree, the rest use a B+tree. There are four systems utilizing a
hash-based representation and four that opted for more spe-
cializedrepresentations.WenowreviewthesystemsinTable
5 by each of the main design choice categories.
MaintripledataWhenreusingtheunderlyinginfrastruc-
tureandtechnologiesofrelationaldatabases,designersmust
deﬁne how the RDF structure is mapped into a relational
structure. 3store [33], RDFLib [46], and Virtuoso [24] use
a large triple table with a ﬁeld for each s,p,o atom together
with some auxiliary indexes. Other relational-based systems
use dynamic subdivision to create a set of relational tables.
Dynamic subdivision restructures the data representa-
tion according to the speciﬁc contents of the graph, its
schema/ontology, or the query load.6 SW-Store [1] subdi-
vides the triples by creating a collection of property tables
(one for each predicate IRI), thus adding some compression
as the predicate value is encoded in the name of the sub-
division rather than in each triple. However, the number of
distinct predicates may be extremely large, causing a large
schematic overhead. DB2 Graph [17], RDFBroker [73], and
FlexTable [80] create tables for groups of predicates. DB2
Graph uses a ﬁxed number of predicate columns populated
according to their prevalence. RDFBroker creates a differ-
ent table for each combination of predicates. FlexTable [80]
allowsatabletohavedifferentpredicatecolumnsonthedata
pagelevel,thusdynamicallyopeningnewtablepageswitha
slightly different schema when such instances appear in the
data. 3XL [48] use the backing ontology of the triplestore
tocreatecomplextablescontainingrelatedinformationfrom
several triples.
Tree-based representations index triples using B+trees as
entry point. Jena(TDB) [58] and RDF3X [55] are the most
notable in this category. Trident [76] follows the relational
subdivision but then concatenates all such subdivisions and
exploitsaB+treeonIDsduringsearch.Hash-basedsolutions
differ on the method in which the hash key is computed and
on the organization of the buckets to which the key points.
TripleT [82] and Oracle Spatial and Graph [84] use multiple
hash-tables for different permutations of s, p, o, such that
one of the positions serves as the hash key and the other
two positions are stored in the buckets. gStore [88] hashes
the IRI and holds its adjacency list in the value as well as
a secondary tree-based construct (see Sect. 5.3). Chameleon
[5]utilizesahashtablefromIRItoasubdivisionofthegraph.
Subdivisions are restructured dynamically according to the
query workload.
We also report on four systems that utilize instead special
representations.TripleBit[87]andBitMat[11]subdividethe
databypredicatethuscreatingabit-matrixforeachpredicate
with rows representing subjects and columns representing
objects. Parliament [45] uses a sorted ﬁle with offset point-
ers from the triple to the next one with the same subject to
allow traversal. Effectively, this divides the triples into vari-
able length blocks of same-value parts. To navigate between
these blocks, Parliament uses either the offset pointers or
6 We only mention mechanisms beyond auto-balancing algorithms
prevalent in B+tree structures that are based on the number of keys in
each subdivision.
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 357
Table3 RDBMS-based Stores. <Preﬁx>#: representations that provide the number of triples with a given preﬁx
X → Y represents a hash/dictionary from key X to value(s) Y
binary search. YARS [36] augments this approach by sub-
dividing the sorted ﬁle into blocks accessible via a sorted
sparse index.
Recently, several data representations have been sug-
gestedspeciﬁcallyforthesupportofworst-case-optimaljoin
(WCOJ) algorithms since those have been shown to be par-
ticularlyefﬁcientforprocessingn-waypivotaccesspatterns.
Although different implementations of these join algorithm
exist [8,18], most have been implemented as extensions to
existingtriplestoresystemsandoftentheyarebothread-only
and provide limited support of the SPARQL standard. The
mostextensiveimplementationisprovidedintheJenaframe-
worktosupporttheLeapfrogTriejoin[38].Here,thisn-way
pivot access pattern is supported through a fully-redundant
representation that adds three additional SPO permutation
indexes to the default indexes in Jena (TDB). Moreover,
it utilizes the preﬁx-sorted subdivision of a B+tree to pro-
vide support for an implementation of the WCOJ algorithm
that exploits the standard single-position pivot access pat-
terns. On the other hand, an extreme case of non-redundant
subdivision instead exploits a ring data structure comprised
of a bidirectional cyclic sufﬁx-strings index that allows the
retrievalofanypermutationofSPOtriples[8].Thisrepresen-
tationishighlysubdividedandincursasubstantialnumberof
seek operations. To minimize the impact of these seeks, the
authorsproposeanextensivecompressionmechanismallow-
ing to maintain the structure in memory and thus minimize
the seek cost. However, as mentioned above, this comes at
the expense of allowing this structure to support additional
access patterns, most notably write and delete patterns.
ID Space Most systems do not to subdivide the ID space.
Of those that do, most subdivide the space between IRI and
literals by assigning different ID ranges rather than storing
them separately as only 3store [33] and Blazegraph [49] do.
Oracle [84] and BitMat [11] present unique choices
for separating values with different roles. Oracle separates
between IDs assigned to IRI of classes and properties from
those assigned to other resources. BitMat separates between
resourcesusedasproperties,assubjectsonly,asobjectsonly,
or either as subjects or objects.
IRI/Literal→ID & reverse ID→IRI For systems that
choose to replace IRI/literals with IDs, the mapping mecha-
123

358 T.Sagietal.
Table4 Non-RDBMS Stores. <Preﬁx># representations that provide the number of triples with a given preﬁx
nism is either B+ trees, which support range queries well, or
hash tables, which are more efﬁcient for single lookup.
5.2 Compression
Table6presentsthetriplestores’compressionchoicesgrouped
by the choice for the main triple store. Most early systems
(circa 2003–2009) do not compress the main data at all. A
number of systems (RDF-3X [55], Sparqling kleene [31],
Virtuoso [24], YARS2 [36]) employ block-level compres-
sion. This approach entails organizing the triples in memory
blocksinamannerthatallowscompressionusingtechniques
such as Huffman encoding [39]. YARS2 [36] also employs
sparse representations (also used by gStore [88] and Triple-
T [82]) where the indexes contain only the used values of
a position, rather than the full domain. SW-store [1] and
TripleBit [87] both use some form of column-compression,
where the values are stored by column, rather than by row,
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 359
Table5 Subdivision design choices
BDR Base data representation, BT B+tree, AVL AVL-tree, RR Relational row store, RC Relational column store, HT Hash table, SF Sorted ﬁle,
SI Sparse index over sorted ﬁle, MAT Matrix, DS Dynamic subdivision, S-D Schema data, U-L IRI-Literal/Large literal, SPO IRI divide by their
position (e.g., only as p)
allowing to skip empty rows, store only the difference from
the previous value (delta-compression) or other column-
compression methods. Trident [76] uses a combination of
different compression mechanisms. In particular, triples are
sorted in so-called binary tables, since they encode only two
ofthe3SPOpositions.Thetriplesarealsorepresentedeither
row-wise or column-wise within different blocks in order to
exploit run-length encoding and other types of compression
when some values are repeated. The ﬁnal three solutions are
derived from the subdivision choices made by the system.
Using a classic relational row-based representation, DB2
Graph [17] chose to limit the number of predicate columns
in its table to a ﬁxed K, this reduces the chances of empty
columns in record rows and can be considered a form of
compression. BitMat [11] employs row-based compression
of its bit-matrix using similar methods as those employed
for column-based compression, and Chameleon [5] utilizes
order-preservingcompressionofitsin-linedliterals.Wealso
note that the ring data structure employed to represent the
graph via a set of sufﬁx strings [8] is a way to compress
the triples and to index all their SPO permutations, yet the
current implementation for RDF is a read-only solution that
requires further study.
A second design choice in the compression dimensions is
whether to avoid storing IRIs and literal values as repeated
strings and instead use numerical IDs. Of the 20 systems
reviewed, only eight chose not to do so. 3XL [48] and
Chameleon[5]replaceonlyIRIwithIDs.3XLleaveallliter-
alsintheiroriginalformandChameleoncompresstheliterals
in place using order-preserving string compression. Virtu-
oso and Jena(TDB) [58] inline small literals and encode the
larger ones. The rest of the systems replace all strings with
IDs, regardless of their type.
ID compression is presented by increasing strength of
compression. Int denotes the usage of sequential integers
instead of the original string-based IRI/literal. More com-
pression can be achieved by compressing the IDs into
ﬁxed-length integers (e.g., Virtuoso [24]). In an example
of extreme compression, TripleBit [87] compress IDs into
an average of 2–3 bytes by using variable-length compres-
123

360 T.Sagietal.
Table6 Compression design choices
B-C: Block-level compression; Sparse: compressed sparse index; C-C: Column-level compression; N-Col: Fixed number of columns; Cube:
Compressed bit-cube; ISC: Inlined string compression; IRI: Only replace IRI with ID; LS: Replace long strings only; All: replace all strings
with integers; Int: a sequential integer (uncompressed, usually 8 bytes); Fix: ID compressed into a ﬁxed-size integer (6 bytes); Var: variable-sized
compressed integers (2–3 Bytes)
sion instead. Notable missing systems from this analysis are
Oracle [84] and GraphDB [15] which do not provide details
regarding this design choice in their publicly available doc-
umentation.
5.3 Redundancy
Table 7 presents a high-level summary of the implementa-
tions employing multiple redundant representations for the
main triple data. On average, there are 3 redundant repre-
sentations per system. Only one system (Sparqling kleene
[31]) offers reachability indexes to answer triple patterns
such as s p* o (i.e., property paths with kleene-start pat-
terns,seeDeﬁnition3).Onlyonesystem(gStore[88])offers
a data representation tuned to matching an N-way same-
position pivot (a star-shaped subgraph structure). gStore is
alsonotableforbeingtheonlysystememployingaBloomier
ﬁlter construct [19] (the VS*-tree) as a secondary data rep-
resentation.Bloomﬁltersallowdeterminingtheexistenceof
a data item using a compact representation with low latency
at the expense of false positives but never false negatives.
Bloomier ﬁlters [19] extend this capability to allow several
functions, in this case returning the vertices matching a set
of PO/SP patterns. The use of a PO/PS hash map as part of
the VS*-tree lookup process is an almost singular example
of using two-position combination hash maps (e.g., sp→o).
Notably, a recent extension of the Jena (TDB) system to
support a worst-case-optimal join algorithm [38] has added
three additional B+-tree indexes to support this pattern. This
results in a high level of redundancy of the data, which new
approaches are trying to overcome with more compressed
(and way less redundant) indexed representations [8]. Also,
Trident [76] employs the replication of the six permutations
oftheSPOpositions,butemploysadaptivestoragerepresen-
tation to reduce the memory footprint.
5.4 Summary
Table8summarizesthekeysinsightsobtainedwhilereview-
ing the surveyed systems as detailed above. In particular, we
list recent trends in implemented design choices and unex-
plored data representations.
Dimensional interdependence As a ﬁnal note, while the
three SCR dimensions are orthogonal and independent for
themostpart,thesurveyedspaceshowsafewcases,wherea
design decision over one dimension impacts the availability
of design decisions in others. This impact can either limit
the availability of options or enable options that could not
be chosen otherwise. For instance, choosing to replace URI
with numerical IDs as a design choice over the compression
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 361
Table7 Redundancy
V: Vertices (s/o). X-YZ: A hash table X = x1 will lead to a datastructure sorted by XYZ where X = x1 or with a small number of other xi values.
TC: Triple counts, a hash table of #-triples per resource (s/p/o). 2VC: 2 Variable counts, for each 2 variable combination (sp, ps, …) maps to the
count of the number of triples for values of that combination. MM : Min/Max Values for each p/block. SF: spo Sorted File with pointers. BC:
Compressed bit-cube of |P| concatenated SO matrices. VST: VS* tree, Hash(PO/PS)→B+ tree→V (VS*-tree) RI: |p| s-*-o reachability indexes
Table8 Summary of the survey of the features of existing systems
Subdivision Compression Redundancy
Prevalent approaches The increasing use of
hash-maps rather than
B+-trees.
Encoding of literals as integers.
Triple store compression
using bit-based
representations.
Multiple (≥ 3) representations
per system.
Gaps Limited use of complex and
hybrid indexes. Limited
support for representations
for optimal N-way joins.
No compression of secondary
indexes.
No support for special ﬁlters
(e.g., language). No use of
bloom-ﬁlters for existence
checks. Limited support for
complex traversals such as
k-hops and reachability. No
support for two-position (e.g.,
sp→o) hash maps.
123

362 T.Sagietal.
dimension,bothenablesandrequiresachoiceofsubdivision
for the ID→IRI and IRI→ID mappings. Similarly, the com-
pression design choice of using non-sequential integers to
encode literals limits the ability of B+-tree and other sorted
structures to support sequence-compatible access patterns
such as closed ranges making these subdivision choices less
attractive.
6 Designspaceanalysis
In this section, we study the data representations within the
design space introduced in Sect. 4, which can be employed
to satisfy the requirements of each access pattern analyzed
in Sect. 3. Each design decision is motivated by a speciﬁc
usecasebutcomeswithinherenttrade-offs.OurSCRmodel
(Sect.4)providesthenecessaryframeworktoexplicitlyana-
lyzetheimplicationsofdifferentdesigndecisions.Therefore,
we also provide an analysis of the existing design decisions
listed in Sect. 5 identifying unexplored design choices.
6.1 Matchingaccesspatternstothedesignspace
In the following, we provide an analysis cross-referencing
theaccesspatternsinTable1totheSCRdimensions(Fig.4)
and their embodiments in Tables 5, 6, and 7. This links the
requirementsofaspeciﬁcaccesspatternwithanappropriate
design choice.
Constants (Table 9) Our model shows that, for access
patternsmatchingpartiallyinstantiatedtriples,thecloselink
between the effects of subdivision, redundancy, and com-
pression is particularly evident. As mentioned earlier, the
presenceofconstantsinanaccesspatternincreasesitsselec-
tivity. A high degree of subdivision for fully and partially
instantiated search patterns is highly beneﬁcial to reduce the
search space. Nevertheless, for partially instantiated triple
patterns we obtain a beneﬁt only if the subdivision is at least
sequence compatible with the positions of the instantiated
variables.Otherwise,whentherepresentationisnotsequence
compatible, the system has to traverse more subsets with a
larger cost in random reads (e.g., if we search for all triples
withaspeciﬁcpredicateandweareusingahashtablerepre-
sentationwithbucketsonsubjectslikeinFig.3).Weconclude
that,forpartiallyinstantiatedtriplepatterns,highsubdivision
canbehighlybeneﬁcialiftheyareperfectlycompatiblewith
the structure of the query, or strongly limit the query perfor-
mance if not. For very large range scans (or when no range
conditionapplies),instead,thecommonapproachtostorethe
entiredatasetwithinaspeciﬁcindexcanbehighlydetrimen-
tal if the data structure does not have the option to perform
an efﬁcient sequential scan (e.g., a linked hash table).
Compression could be beneﬁcial for fully instantiated
access if it allows searching efﬁciently for the compressed
values. Yet, employing compression is detrimental if several
decompression steps are required to check the existence of
speciﬁc values. On the other hand, for partially instantiated
triple patterns, given that we expect a larger intermedi-
ate result, compression could reduce data transfer times.
Moreover,wecouldimplementsearchthroughbitwisecom-
parisons [87]. For uninstantiated access patterns, we will
instead usually gain a substantial beneﬁt from compression
due to the reduced data transfer cost.
Finally,ontheredundancydimension,inthefullyinstanti-
ated case adata representation designed toanswer existence
queries (e.g., Bloom ﬁlter) is highly beneﬁcial. Instead,
for partially instantiated queries we should exploit differ-
ent tree or hash indexes as we search for bindings to the
variable positions given the instantiated positions. Hence,
multiple indexes are necessary to cover different combi-
nations of instantiated and uninstantiated positions (e.g.,
s, p→o or s,o→p). In both cases, high redundancy pro-
vides advantages for partially and fully instantiated access
patterns. Conversely, redundancy is ineffective for uninstan-
tiatedqueriessinceanentirescanofthedatawillberequired.
Filter (Table 10) For ﬁlters, when the subdivision is
sequence compatible with the search range, it has a positive
effect. When the representation is not sequence compatible,
i.e., the values span multiple partitions, the subdivision will
causealargercost.Instead,whentheﬁlterconditionrequires
membershiptoaparticularlysmallsetofvaluesanditispos-
sibletoenumeratethosevalues(e.g.,yearsbetween2015and
2020), we can actually exploit a hash table index translating
this access pattern into fully or partially instantiated triple
patterns. Still, this approach requires the system to be aware
ofthedomainortohaveaprecomputedsetofvalues.Forthe
case where no ﬁlter condition is speciﬁed, in the worst case
we require a full scan of the data or to execute a partially
instantiated BGP (see above). Compression is beneﬁcial in
termsofdatatransferbutcouldbedetrimentalwhenattribute
valuesneedtobecomparedinaﬁlteroperation.Intheredun-
dancy dimension, on the other hand, for ﬁlters involving a
large range of values or a range of values that cannot be
enumerated, a tree index is a common effective solution, as
long as it supports range scans, i.e., the data representation
issequence compatible afterpayinganinitialseekcost,e.g.,
a B+ tree.
Traversals(Table11)Fortraversalaccesspatterns,1-hop
traversals are a special case of a partially instantiated triple
pattern (i.e., SP and PO). Therefore, for 1-hop traversals the
advantages of subdivision and redundancy are the same as
those of the corresponding partially instantiated access pat-
tern in Table 9. When the traversal is bound by a speciﬁc
predicate, subdivision across edges of the same predicate
is usually highly effective in reducing the search space and
achievesparticularlygoodperformancewhenthedatarepre-
sentation is seek-compatible to the access pattern retrieving
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 363
Table9 Effect of different storage solutions for each SCR dimension to address access patterns for Constants in the query
Fully instantiated Partially instantiated Uninstantiated
Subdivision ↑ smaller search space ↑ smaller search space if
compatible with
query; ↓ more search
steps if incompatible
↓ more search steps
Compression ↓ decompression
required to search
exact values; ↓
intermediate resultset
is small
↓ decompression
required to search
exact values; ↑
compressing
intermediate results
↑ compressing
intermediate results
Redundancy ↑ A Bloom ﬁlter to
check existence
↑ different SPO tree or
hash indexes
∼ requires full scan of
data
↑ points to an advantage, ↓ points to a drawback, ∼ points to a mostly unaffected performance (also in the following tables
Table10 Effect of different storage solutions for each SCR dimension to address Filter access patterns in the query
Enumerable range Large range No-range
Subdivision ↑ faster search of single
values if compatible; ↓
more search steps if
incompatible
↑ faster search of single
values if compatible; ↓
more search steps if
incompatible
↓ more search steps
Compression ↓ decompression to
access small set; ↑
compressing
intermediate results
↑ faster read; ↑
compressing
intermediate results
↑ compressing
intermediate results; ↓
decompression
required for search
Redundancy ↑ hash-table search ↑ B+Tree search
&sorted scan
∼ requires full scan
the next edge in the path. On the other hand, for traversals
thatarenotboundbyaspeciﬁcpredicate,subdivision across
the same subjects can provide some beneﬁts, but subdivi-
sion across predicates or other kinds of subdivisions usually
increase the number of required search steps since they are
not seek-compatible. In general, compressing intermediate
results can be highly effective for large intermediate result
sets. However, using a compressed representation could be
expensive if the compression does not allow (for instance)
fast intersections (e.g., intersect objects and subjects lists).
Finally,exploitingredundancy,whentheaccesspatternstarts
fromanodeandtraversesaﬁxedsetofk-hopswiththesame
propertyoranunboundedsetofhops(*/+-hops),specialized
indexes can be highly effective [31].
Pivot (Table 12) Access patterns that are joined together
onthesamesubject,withthepivotjoiningeitherbinaryorN
differenttriplepatterns(formingso-calledstarshapes [77]),
are among the most optimized by existing triplestores (see
Sect. 5). On the subdivision dimension, different schemes
to partition over subjects are commonly applied to provide
sequencecompatibilityandarethenveryeffective.Inpartic-
ular, representing attributes as table columns in a relational
model (e.g., Fig. 3c) has also proven highly beneﬁcial [17].
Other similar clustered representations could in theory be
adapted to answer speciﬁc types of pivots joining N differ-
ent triple patterns. In the general case, WCOJ [38] requires
differentrepresentationstoaccesstriplesinsortedorder.For
pivot patterns on object to subject, the trade-offs are similar
to a special case of a 2-hop traversal, although in this case,
the predicates involved are also distinct and the intermedi-
atevariablebindingisusuallyreturned.Therefore,onecould
employadhocindexesfordifferent2-hoppaths,deploysub-
divisions based on predicates, or compressions that enable
bit-wise intersections. Compression can of course help data
transfer, but can help search, e.g., with id intersection across
compressedrepresentations.Finally,employingredundancy,
most indexes provide fast execution of these patterns, bene-
ﬁcial for modern join algorithms, e.g., WCOJ [38].
Return (Table 13) The requirements of access patterns
are also dependent on the type of information they extract
fromtheevaluationoftheBGP,i.e.,thereturnedvalues.This
means that, to return all the variable bindings, Subdivision,
dependinghowimplemented,caneitherincreasethenumber
of steps required to obtain the answers or instead provide a
beneﬁt by allowing to read less data, depending on its com-
patibility to the access pattern. One important advantage is
provided by sorted representations when those are compati-
ble with the sorting order imposed by the query (e.g., by an
123

364 T.Sagietal.
Table11 Effect of different storage solutions for each SCR dimension to address Traversal access patterns in the query
1-hop k-hops over p */+-hops over p
Subdivision ↑ property-table or
clustered on S or
SP, faster
search/retrieval
↑ clustered on P or
PS, faster
search/retrieval; ↓
more search steps
if divided over O
↑ clustered on P or
PS, faster
search/retrieval; ↓
more search steps
if cluster is
incompatible
Compression ↓ requires
decompression; ↑
compressing
intermediate
results
↓ requires
decompression; ↑
compressing
intermediate
results; ↑ bitwise
set intersection
↓ requires
decompression; ↑
compressing
intermediate
results; ↑↑ bitwise
set intersection
Redundancy ↑ hash-index on S or
SP, faster
search/retrieval
↑ execute as set of
1-hops; ↑
specialized index
[31]
↑ execute as set of
1-hops; ↑
specialized index
[31]
Table12 Effect of different storage solutions for each SCR dimension to address Pivot access patterns in the query
Two-way same S/O/P Two-way different S/O/P N-way pivot
Subdivision ↑ clustered-properties [17]
less retrieval steps
↑ restrict search space ↑ clustered-properties [17]
less retrieval steps for the
same position; ↑ sorted
representations provide
WCOJ [38] guarantees
Compression ↓ requires decompression; ↑ compressing intermediate results; ↑ bitwise set intersection
Redundancy ↑ hash-index fast search ↑ Hash-index fast search ↑ B+-tree WCOJ [38]
guarantees
ORDER BY clause). On the other hand, when only distinct
value bindings are needed, a key-value data structure could
be exploited to just scan the keys, thus allowing even a scan-
compatible access. Note that this may not be possible for
arbitraryhashindexes.Also,forgroupbyaggregates,Subdi-
vision could be beneﬁcial when all the values over which to
computethedistinctoperatorresidewithinasinglepartition.
A subdivision that is at least sequence compatible with the
access via the group-by key would also provide improved
performance.
Compression can be advantageous for transmission of
large intermediate results when returning all answers, but
when returning results to the user, we will need to decom-
press all the variable bindings, incurring extra work. Note
that some compression methods are particularly effective
for, or even require, sorted data. Moreover, for return-
ing distinct values, compression of repeated values (e.g.,
〈key;count〉 pairs) could improve the scan performance and
avoidgeneratingduplicatesintheﬁrstplace.Whenverifying
existence, compression could be detrimental if decompres-
sion is required before checking the predicate. Finally, in
case of aggregate information, representations in the form
of pre-aggregated values provide a large advantage, while
compression increases the cost, except for counts when the
actual values to be counted are not needed.
Redundancy does not introduce any further advantage or
disadvantage when all values are required to be returned,
unless the values need to be returned in a particular oder. In
thiscase,havingaredundantrepresentationcompatiblewith
the required order will save an expensive sorting step. Fur-
thermore, when a search pattern veriﬁes only existence, e.g.,
toverifywhethernoden1 isreachablefromn0 withoutactu-
ally listing the paths that connect the two, Bloom ﬁlters and
similar types of set-based indexes (i.e., higher redundancy)
could be exploited effectively and provide perfect compat-
ibility. Finally, storing aggregate data in distinct redundant
data structures is highly beneﬁcial to save computations.
Write(Table14)Writeoperationsusuallyincurtwosteps:
(i)determiningwhichtuplestoinsertordeleteand(ii)mate-
rializing their insertion or deletion. The ﬁrst step requires
the same form of access pattern as read queries. However,
in the second step different data representations need to be
updated to have one or more triples added or removed. In
particular, with higher subdivision usually we only need to
updatesmalllocalizeddatastructurescontainingthetupleto
insert or delete. This can also allow smaller localized locks,
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 365
Table13
EffectofdifferentstoragesolutionsforeachSCR
dimensiontoaddressReturnaccesspatternsinthequery
All(unsorted)
All(sorted)
Distinct
Existence
Aggregate
Subdivision
↓
moresearchstepsifdividedresults;↑
betterperformanceforsortedretrieval
↓
moresearchstepsifdividedresults;↑
smallsearchspaceifcompatible.
↑
favorableto
group-by
operations
Compression
↑
compressingintermediateresults;↓
decompressionﬁnalresults
↑
fastskipover
repeatedvalues
↓
decompression
requiredtocheck
existence
↓
decompression
requiredto
computeaggregate
Redundancy
∼
allresultsare
returned
unprocessed
↑
avoidsortingover
sorted
representation
↑
inakey-valuedata
structureaccess
onlykeys
↑Bloom
ﬁltersearch
↑
precomputed
values
Table14
EffectofdifferentstoragesolutionsforeachSCR
dimensiontoaddressW
riteaccesspatternsinthequery
Insert
Delete
Subdivision
↑
localizedupdates;↑
smallerlocks;↓
resizingofsinglesubdivision;↓
re-distributesubdivisions
↑
localizedupdates;↑
smallerlocks;↓
re-distributesubdivisions
Compression
↓
requiresdecompression;↑
insertiondoesnotrequireresizing;
↓
requiresdecompression;
Redundancy
↓
multipleupdatesarerequired
123

366 T.Sagietal.
improving concurrency. Yet, when an insertion takes place,
we may need to resize the data structure. In some cases, this
results in a chain effect for the redistribution of elements
among partitions such as in a B+ tree node that reached the
maximum capacity, or in a sorted list. In compressed repre-
sentations,bothinsertanddeletemayrequiredecompression
andre-compression.Ontheotherhand,structureslikeﬁxed-
sizebitmapscanbeupdatedmoreeasilywithsimplebitﬂips.
Other structures, like Bloom-ﬁlters, instead do usually not
allowdeletesbutonlyinsertions.Finally,higherredundancy
requires each write operation to be mirrored in every redun-
dant copy.
6.2 Acompatibility-basedanalysis
After exploring how the the design space dimensions inter-
sectwiththeaccesspatterns,wenowshowhowthenotionof
compatibility and the cost model presented in Sect. 4 can be
used to asses the ﬁt between existing solutions (as surveyed
in Sect. 5) and these access patterns. Furthermore, our clas-
siﬁcation enables identifying unexplored design options and
characterization of the optimal design choice for an access
pattern.
Analysis methodology Starting with a speciﬁc cell in
one of Tables 9, 10, 11, 12, or 13, one can investigate
whether a new data representation could be employed in
order to improve speciﬁc trade-offs. For example, consider
rangequeries(i.e.,aﬁlteraccesspattern)andtheredundancy
dimension. In this case, we did not identify any existing
solution that adopts skip-list implementation (e.g., S3 [91])
or succint indexes (e.g., SuRF [90]) optimized for both
key-value search and range queries in order to support par-
tiallyinstantiatedqueriesandranges.Similarly,fewsystems
explicitly employ stored representations (e.g., increasing
redundancy) for the special type ranges (Filter T in Table 1)
whichcouldbemappedtoanenumerablerangeofpredeﬁned
values (e.g., language tags).
A more advanced analysis can be performed for a spe-
ciﬁc query. Consider as an example the case of returning
the count of values over a partially instantiated BGP with
ﬁxedpredicateandvariablesubjectandobject,e.g.,SELECT
?s COUNT(?o) WHERE { ?s ex:friendOf ?o }
GROUP BY ?s. For this case, we did not ﬁnd systems that
have a compressed representation of 〈key;count〉 and a seek
compatible subdivision over predicates.
AnalysisresultsTable15presentsasummaryoftheanal-
ysis insights. In particular, we show for read-only access
patterns the best choice found across existing implementa-
tions as well as design choices that have not been explored
despite(theoretically)providingbetterperformance.Wealso
pointoutthosecaseswheresomewidespreaddesignchoices
have important incompatibility with some access patterns,
identifying cases where better options could be studied.
Considering the Subdivision dimension, many systems
implement separate tables for triples sharing a speciﬁc pred-
icate. For instance, queries that match triples with the same
subjectcanusuallyexploittheclusteredrepresentationwhere
several properties for the same subject are stored together in
a single row [17]. Similarly, BGPs describing triples sharing
the same object can exploit an analogous data organization.
On the other hand, a constant in s or o can be exploited
by a hash index of the form s →po. Yet, no representation
exploits subdivision for a pair of constants, e.g., sp→o. For
ﬁxed N-way pivot on the same variable, subdivisions like a
property-table, i.e., a table where each column is a property
for the same subject, can be seen as efﬁcient solutions, but
are compatible only with a limited set of access patterns.
Conversely, inalltheirforms,ﬁlteroperatorsare,ingeneral,
efﬁcientlyexecutedoverclusteredandsortedrepresentations
forvalues(e.g.,B+trees),orotherindexesthatpreserveorder
(e.g., skip lists). Yet, overall, we see that there is a strong
incompatibility between ﬁlters on literals and the fact that
all representations store literals and special types in mixed
subdivisions.Also,wenotethatsubdivisionaloneisnotsuf-
ﬁcient because it can only be compatible with few access
patterns, so (as also discussed in the paragraphs below) a
system will always require redundant representations.
Our survey also reveals the absence of index compres-
sion solutions (e.g., [89]). For instance, we do not ﬁnd any
applicationofeffectivecompressionsolutionsforsecondary
representations, such as counting indexes (e.g., sp→#) and
structures like bloom-ﬁlters [26] or compact LSM-tries like
SuRF [90] that can also support existence checks, which are
prevalent in the existing workloads (as discussed in the next
section).
For redundancy, while 1-hop s→o queries are the most
commonandinvolveasingletriple,specializedindexeshave
been proposed to speed up reachability and multi-hop path
expressions (e.g., Sparqling kleene [31]). Apart from Parlia-
ment[45],onecanrarelyﬁnddatarepresentationssupporting
traversalpatternsasrequiredbyk-hopand*-hopaccesspat-
terns.Furthermore,solutionstendtorelyonstandardB+-tree
and hash map implementations, avoiding the use of hybrid
structures (e.g., hybrid indexes [65]). An exception is the
VS*-tree adopted by gStore [88], which, among others, can
also return all subjects or objects that match a speciﬁc set of
predicates and values, thus addressing the needs of a sub-
set of the N-way pivot access pattern where the variable
has the same position in all triple patterns. Data representa-
tionsthatcanefﬁcientlyreturnpre-computedmatchcountsor
other pre-computed aggregate values provide direct beneﬁts
(e.g.,group-by-queryclusters[4]).Nonetheless,redundancy
is used to a large extent.
Recentadvancementinqueryoptimizationhaveledtothe
introduction of worst-case optimal join algorithms (WCOJ)
[8,38] that make use of highly redundant representations.
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 367
Table15 Compatibility between Access patterns and design choices
Access pattern Best found Incompatible Unexplored
S, P, O 1 Constant Hash table(+sL, +sK, +sQ),
Separate Table(+sL, +sQ)
Incompatible Hash table(-sL,-sK,-sQ) Surf(+sL, +sK, +sQ),
S3(+sL, +sQ)
SP, SO, PO 2 Constants Hash Table(+sK, +sQ),
B+Tree(+sL, +sQ)
SuRF(+sL, +sK, +sQ),
so→p, sp→o(+sL, +sK,
+sQ), S3(+sL, +sQ)
SPO 3 Constants Hash Table(+sK, +sQ),
B+Tree(+sL, +sQ)
Bloom ﬁlter(+sL, +sK)
< & > Closed range B+Tree(+sL, +sQ) Mixed Literals/URI(-sL, -sQ) SuRF(+sL, +sK, +sQ), Skip
list(+sL, +sQ)
< | > Open range B+Tree(+sL, +sQ) Mixed Literals/URI(-sL, -sQ) SuRF(+sL, +sK, +sQ), Skip
list(+sL, +sQ)
T Special type range Partial subdivision of ID
ranges(+sL, +sQ)
representations mix these(-sL,-sK,-sQ) Separate Tables/Files(+sL,
+sQ)
s→o 1-hop over p Hash Table(+sK, +sQ),
Matrix(+sK, +sQ),
Separate Table(+sL, +sQ)
sp→o(+sL, +sK, +sQ)
s k−→ o k-hop p1,..., pk Separate p matrix(+sL),
Reachability Index(+sL,
+sQ), VS*-tree(+sL)
sp→o(+sL, +sK)
p∗/+ ?-hop over p Separate p matrix(+sL),
Reachability Index(+sL)
2-way same position Single Hash table(+sK,
+sQ)
B+Tree(-sK, +sL) sp→o(+sL, +sK, +sQ)
2-way different position Pre-joined
materialization(+sL,
+sQ); Reachability
Index(+sL, +sQ)
B+Tree(-sK, -sL, -sQ) 4-position hash-map(+sK,
+sL, +sQ)
N-way same position VS*-tree (+sK); Indexed
Property table(+sL,+sQ);
Multiple B+Tree(-sK, -sL,
-sQ)
Incompatible Hash table(-sL,-sK,-sQ) Dyadic tree [43] (+sL)
N-way arbitrary position Multiple B+Tree(-sK, -sL,
-sQ)
Incompatible Hash table(-sL,-sK,-sQ) Dyadic tree [43] (+sL)
All values Single ﬁle(+sQ)
Sorted values B+tree(+sL, +sQ); Sorted
table(+sL, +sQ)
Hash Table (-sL, -sQ)
Distinct values Hash table(+sK, +sL) Value counts(+sL, +sK,
+sQ)
Existence Hash table(+sK) Bloom ﬁlter (+sK, +sL)
Aggregate Store counts(+sL, +sK,
+sQ), group-by
clusters(+sL, +sK, +sQ)
Compressed Value
counts(+sL, +sK, +sQ)
Inbracketswehighlightthecompatibilities:selectioncompatible(+sL),seekcompatible(+sK),sequencecompatible(+sQ),andthecorresponding
incompatibilities (-sL, -sK, -sQ)
These algorithms limit query complexity to a factor of the
ﬁnal result size by performing an N-way join with a pivot
over the same variable in all positions. Current implementa-
tionsrequiresortedaccesstoasingletriplepatternfortriples
matching theBGP sharing the samevariable. However, con-
ceptually, a solution providing all mappings of a variable
at once could support these algorithms better. The dyadic
tree proposed to index gap boxes in the geometric resolu-
tion approach to multi-way joins [43] provides a possible
avenue for providing such support. A gap box is a multi-
dimensional representation of the uncovered portions of the
domainsofvariablesparticipatinginamulti-wayjoin.Inthe
absence of such a representation for RDF data, one solution
[38](extendingaJenaTDBsystem)usesatotalof6B+-tree
indexestocoverallpositionpermutationsandthussettlesfor
a non-optimal (non seek-compatible) fully redundant solu-
123

368 T.Sagietal.
tion.Anotherrecentsolution[8]optsforahighlycompressed
and extremely subdivided wavelet-tree-based structure that
isbuiltasabidirectionalsporingwhichrepresentstheentire
graph as a string and indexes all its sufﬁxes. However, the
current implementation does not support many other access
patterns, most notably, from the write dimension.
Thus, in practical applications one is required to consider
a full-system design and to analyze the access patterns of an
entire workload. We provide an example of such analysis in
the following section.
7 Workloadcaseanalysis
Inthissection,weprovideanempiricalanalysisoftheaccess
patterns present in different workloads from existing bench-
marksanddatasets.Moreover,weshowhowtheanalysiscan
be used to guide the choice of which data representations to
adopt with respect to a query workload.
7.1 Analyzedworkloads
Previous analyses (e.g., [70]) focused on speciﬁc features of
the language and query complexity (i.e., the topology of the
graphpatterns).Therefore,suchanalysesarecenteredaround
thosecharacteristicsthatwouldimpactmainlythequeryopti-
mizer. Instead, here we present an analysis of the access
patterns speciﬁc to the storage layer (described in Sect. 3)
whoseperformancehavedirectcorrelationwiththeavailable
physicaldatarepresentations.Inthissense,thisanalysisalso
provides a complementary view to existing studies.
In particular, we employ 10 workloads: 5 from popular
synthetic SPARQL benchmarks and 5 based on real-world
query-logs. The synthetic benchmarks are the Lehigh Uni-
versityBenchmark(LUBM)[32],SP2Bench[71],theLDBC
Social Network Benchmark (LDBC) [23], the FEASIBLE
Benchmark [69], and the Waterloo SPARQL Diversity Test
Suite(WatDiv)[3],comprising14,17,19,50,and50queries,
respectively.
The real workloads are based on queries against public
biological knowledge graphs (BioBench [83]), query logs
from the DBpedia endpoint [16], user submitted queries to
the public WikiData endpoint [79], the Semantic Web Dog
Food query log [53], and a popular benchmark for complex
natural question answering over Freebase (Complex) [75].
Theworkloadscontain22,46,3.4k,64k,and169.7kqueries.
To identify the access patterns, we implemented a static
analysisparserforSPARQL,availableonline.7 Theanalyzer
extracts the parse tree from each query with the Jena query
parser[7]andautomaticallymapsqueryconstructsmatching
the aforementioned access patterns (see Sect. 3 and Fig. 2).
7 https://github.com/tomersagi/rdf_access_patterns.
Hence, the input of the parses is a given query workload,
and the output is the analysis of the prevalence of each spe-
ciﬁc access pattern in the given workload. We envision that
the provided tool can be used by practitioners to evaluate
their own query logs for the prevalence of speciﬁc access
patterns. These patterns can then be compared with the sup-
port provided by their systems of choice. Thus, for example,
if a workload is characterized by an abundance of k-hops, it
would be prudent to evaluate the support by the current sys-
temcomparedtoanalternativesystemthatprovidesasuitable
representation,suchastheVS*-treeprovidedbygStore[88]
or the reachability index in Sparqling kleene [31].
7.2 Limitations
In general, the existence of an access pattern in a query does
not mean that a speciﬁc system must utilize it to answer the
query. For example, k-hop patterns such as {s1 p1/p2 ?o1}
canbeansweredbyconvertingtheBGPintothe O ≡ S pivot
pattern{s1p1?v1.?v1p2?o}.Anotherexampleisthesorted
value return pattern, which can be used by different algo-
rithmstoanswerotherquerypatternsaswell,e.g.,byWCOJ
[38] to perform the efﬁcient intersection in an N-way pivot.
Yet,inouranalysis,wecountedonlyqueriesexplicitlyrequir-
ing sorted output in the formof an ORDER BYclause. Also,
we excluded from this analysis those ORDER BY clauses
that followed an aggregation resulting from a GROUP BY
clause, since the sorted output could not be directly derived
from a sorted retrieval operation.
7.3 Resultsanddiscussion
The aggregated results over all benchmarks are presented in
Table 16. Constants are mainly used in predicate (P) and
subject-predicate (SP) combinations. The abundance of P-
constant patterns justiﬁes the prevalent use of subdivision
by predicates in the systems reviewed, which allows rapid
reduction of the search space. SP combinations are better
served by point-lookup mechanisms such as hash maps, yet
this alone does not justify the redundancy of having indexes
for all permutations of SPO since, for instance, patterns
selecting objects (O) are quite rare.
The large number of binary same-position (e.g., S≡S)
pivots requires systems to supplement the subdivision of
data representations by predicate with other redundant data
representations supporting access patterns compatible with
selection by subject/object. Within the binary different-
position pivot (BiD in Table 16), the O≡S pivot dominates
since very few queries involve the pivot in the predicate
positions. The N-way pivots are highly prevalent in all
benchmarks.Perhapssurprisingly,arbitrarypositionvariable
centric pivots (NwA in Table 16), are almost as prevalent as
starpatterns.TherecentemergenceofWCOJalgorithms[38]
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 369
Table16 Prevalence of access patterns in popular RDF benchmarks
Color marks prevalence: Yellow/Medium 0.33−0.66, High/Red >0.66; 0.0∗ marks values in 0.0 − 0.01. [ ] represents a closed range, [ ) an open
range, and Sp* a special range. SkO and OkS represent K-step S→O and O→S traversals, respectively. All: all values, DV: distinct values, ST:
sorted, EX: existence check, Σ aggregate. Pivot acronyms: BiS: Binary same position, BiD: Binary different position, Star: N-way same position
is also known as a star pattern, NwA: N-way arbitrary position
optimizing this access pattern has exposed the limitations of
existing data representations in supporting this pattern and
requiredtheintroductionofnovelrepresentationssuchasthe
recently proposed ring [8], that allows all-position pivots on
a selected variable in a single representation.
Notably, a large number of benchmark queries employ
special range ﬁlters, e.g., ﬁlters for speciﬁc languages (e.g.,
@en), or speciﬁc types of literals, i.e., numeric values vs.
strings vs. dates. This is especially prevalent when querying
multi-language knowledge graphs and when ﬁltering values
only for literals of a speciﬁc data type. This calls for indexes
orsubdivisionsoftripleobjectsbylanguagesanddatatypes.
Yet, none of the data representations in the reviewed storage
systems explicitly support such access patterns although the
benchmark queries suggest they could be especially useful.
Conversely, the relative absence of closed/open range ﬁlters
from most benchmarks corresponds well with the decreased
relianceofsystemsonB+-treesobservedinSection5.3asthe
relativeadvantageofB+treesoverhash-basedlookupmech-
anisms is greatly diminished in the absence of closed/open
range queries or other access patterns that require sorted
access.
When examining the traversal patterns, it is evident that
1-hop traversals dominate although k-hop traversals have a
substantial presence as well. It is interesting to note how
LDBC queries represent an outlier since almost all queries
employ k-hop traversals. For those special workloads, a sys-
tem supporting efﬁcient k-hops (e.g., gStore [88]) could
outperform systems that are forced to break these k-hops
up into multiple 1-hop patterns. Moreover, traversals with
unbounded path queries (marked as P∗) are quite rare. This
rarity renders reachability indexes not so useful in prac-
tice when compared to the extra space and update cost they
require. It is an open question whether the currently lim-
ited presence of these queries is due to the complexity of
the query language (i.e., users are not familiar in express-
ing such queries) or to most systems not being optimized
for these access patterns and hence known to result in slow
queries that are avoided by users.
Another important ﬁnding is that over 80% of all the
queries can make use of existence access patterns. Recall
thatinthesepatterns,notriplevaluesarerequired,butonlya
simpletestofexistence.Thisprevalenceisespeciallystriking
when considering that almost no existing data representa-
tionsspeciﬁcallytargetexistencequeries.Inmanyways,the
success of bit representations such as TripleBit [87] and Bit-
Mat[11]canbeattributedtothisprevalence.Therefore,data
representationsthatarecompatiblewithexistenceaccesspat-
terns, such as Bloom ﬁlters, are an unexplored but highly
promising addition to existing systems and could very likely
replaceless-frequentlyusedindexes(e.g.,B+-treeson OSP
permutations). There is a relatively low number of queries
requiring an explicit sorted result. This allows for the use
of unsorted representations and algorithms for much of the
retrieval,leavingthesortingforpost-processing. Finally,we
see that distinct values are often required while aggregation
is present in only a few queries. However, once more, since
aggregationqueriesarecurrentlycomputationallyexpensive,
wecouldnotexcludethatbetterperformanceforsuchqueries
would result in more frequent use.
One could also use Table 16 to perform retrospective
analysis of previously published benchmarks. For example,
upon its introduction, DB2 Graph [17] was compared with
RDF-3X [55] over both LUBM and DBpedia. Two major
differences between these two benchmarks are the preva-
lence of P-position constant queries in DBpedia as well as
more queries returning distinct values and existence checks
ratherthanfullresults.Thus,onewouldexpectRDF-3Xwith
123

370 T.Sagietal.
its P-centric data representations (which DB2 Graph lacks)
and usage of IRI replacement to perform comparatively bet-
ter on DBpedia than on LUBM. Indeed, the more modern
DB2 Graph was not able to outperform RDF-3X on DBpe-
dia although doing twice as well on LUBM.
8 Relatedsurveys
Sakr and Al-Naymat [68] deﬁned a taxonomy of data repre-
sentationsforrelational-basedRDFtriplestores.Inthiswork,
we review all centralized RDF triplestores.
Modoni et al. [52] review triplestores in the context of
their usefulness as meta data management systems used by
other software in an enterprise scenario. Thus, they focus on
technical and non-functional features such as user manage-
ment, security, and programming language support, unlike
our focus on data representation.
Maet.al.[50]reviewRDFtriplestoresbytheirlogicaldata
representation, dividing the landscape into relational (tra-
ditional) and non-relational (NoSQL). They further divide
relational representations into vertical (single triple table
with 3 columns s p o), horizontal (s as row p as column o as
value / s as row, p as table and o as value) and type (multiple
standard horizontal tables partitioned by the s type). In this
work, we abstract beyond relational/non-relational, looking
at three orthogonal design dimensions.
Özsu[59]focusesonseveralrepresentativesolutionscon-
trasting the centralized versus the distributed approach, and
within the centralized approach lists a few architectural
choices such as whether to rely on a relational mapping
from RDF to an RDBMS. Pan et al. [60] present a similar
taxonomy, complementing it with a review of the promi-
nent benchmarks used in the ﬁeld and a short comparative
empiricalevaluation.Inthiswork,weinsteadabstractacross
different architectural choices to identify the underlying
design space.
Abdelaziz et al. [2] focus in their review on distributed
triplestores and on large-scale benchmarks. Kaoudi and
Manolescu [42] similarly limit their analysis to cloud-native
solutions. In this work, we focus on centralized stores since
the distribution of a data structure can be handled as an
orthogonal aspect.
Wylot et al. [85] provide a taxonomy whose two main
branches are centralized and distributed, albeit with a more
detailed categorization of the centralized branch into six
architectural approaches. The six types offered are: triple
tables,propertytables,indexpermutations,verticalpartition-
ing,graph-based,andbinarystorage.Whilethesecorrespond
to some of the options in our subdivision and redundancy
dimensions, the authors do not discuss additional solutions
weidentify,e.g.,speciﬁcindexesforspeciﬁcaccesspatterns,
such as hash indexes and reachability indexes. They do not
explicitly address compression options (as we do in Table 6)
and they do not discuss the compatibility between access
patterns and design choices. In this paper, we identify the
ﬁne-graineddesignspaceoptionsavailabletosystemdesign-
ers and align them across three orthogonal dimensions to
allowidentifyingnew,previouslyunexplored,combinations.
Therefore, our analysis is signiﬁcantly more generalizable,
asdemonstratedbyourabilitytoanalyze22systemsoverthe
proposedSCRspace,overcomingthelimitationsofWylotet
al. [85].
Pérezetal.[62]performedworst-casecomplexityanalysis
of SPARQL operators regardless of any indexes or physical
data representations by counting the number of edges tra-
versed in a conceptual graph representation for each pattern.
In our work, we align between design choices for data rep-
resentation and their effect on the cost of different access
patterns.
The Data Calculator is based on the analysis provided
by the RUM Conjecture [10], which explores the trade-offs
between read times (R), update cost (U), and memory (or
storage)overhead(M).TheintuitionbehindtheRUMconjec-
tures is also shared by our SCR space, although we perform
a complementary analysis.
Finally,inthedesignofPeloton[61],Pavloetal.presentan
overviewofself-drivingactions,i.e.,thetypesofactionsthat
aself-tuning(alsocalledself-driving)relationalsystemmust
support. These actions are divided in three classes: runtime
actions, physical actions, and data actions. Moreover, these
actions are limited to the relational data model. In practice,
for the storage level, they only allow either to move from
columnar layout to row layout, and vice versa, or to add
and drop indices. Nonetheless, we envision the possibility
to expand the Peloton framework to the case of triplestores
and believe that the analysis provide here is a fundamental
contribution in this direction.
9 Conclusionsandfuturework
Inthiswork,weintroducethenewSubdivision-Compression-
Redundancy (SCR) design space of data representations for
RDF databases. We also introduce a new feature space for
analyzing query workload access patterns. Together, they
allow the analysis of RDF store design decisions, speciﬁ-
cally, which data representations can effectively support a
given workload. We performed an analysis of popular RDF
store benchmarks under these assumptions and showed that
multi-hoptraversalsandexistencechecksarebroadlyunder-
served by existing RDF store designs, which are oriented
toward providing support for 1-hop traversals, pivots, and
access patterns featuring a constant predicate value. Many
of these design choices can be made at run-time (e.g., by
usinganautomatedtuningmechanism)followinganinspec-
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 371
tion of a query load or in advance for a planned workload.
To map between query loads and design choices, we offer a
simple cost model, a feature space over which query loads
can be evaluated, and an analysis of the impact of these
choices. Thus, we lay the ground for future RDF stores to
design novel solutions over this space in an informed man-
ner. Such designs can be achieved either manually or even
semiautomatically as proposed by the recent effort in self-
designing data structures [40] and self-organizing relational
database systems [61]. By cross-referencing the access pat-
terns in a query workload with SCR design options, future
RDF stores will be able to add components of the system
to match expected workload. In future work, we intend to
explore the architecture and design principles of such sys-
tems.
Acknowledgements We wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for
thedetailedandinsightfulcommentsthatallowedustogreatlyimprove
the ﬁnal version of this manuscript.
Funding This work is supported by the Independent Research Fund
DenmarkunderGrantNo.DFF-8048-00051B(RelWeb)andtheSEMI-
OTIC project, Aalborg University’s Talent Programme, the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant agreement No. 838216, and the Poul
Due Jensen Foundation.
Data availability The data in this work were collected from public
datasets (see Sect. 7 for references and a link to our code).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interests The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Abadi,D.J.,Marcus,A.,Madden,S.R.,Hollenbach,K.:SW-Store:
averticallypartitionedDBMSforsemanticwebdatamanagement.
VLDB J. 18(2), 385–406 (2009)
2. Abdelaziz, I., Harbi, R., Khayyat, Z., Kalnis, P.: A survey and
experimental comparison of distributed SPARQL engines for very
large RDF data. Proc. VLDB Endow. 10(13), 2049–2060 (2017)
3. Aluç, G., Hartig, O., Tamer Özsu, M., Daudjee, K.: Diversiﬁed
stress testing of RDF data management systems. In: ISWC. pp.
197–212 (2014)
4. Aluç, G., Tamer Özsu, M., Daudjee, K., Hartig, O.: Executing
queriesoverschemalessRDFdatabases.In:ICDE.807–818(2015)
5. Aluç, G., Tamer Özsu, M., Daudjee, K.: Building self-clustering
RDF databases using tunable-LSH. VLDB J. 28(2), 173–195
(2019)
6. Andrzejewski, W., Wrembel, R.: GPU-WAH: applying GPUs
to compressing bitmap indexes with word aligned hybrid. In:
DatabaseandExpertSystemsApplications,pp.315–329.Springer,
Berlin (2010)
7. Apache: Apache Jena. Accessed jan. 4, 2020. http://jena.apache.
org (2020)
8. Arroyuelo, D., Hogan, A., Navarro, G., Reutter, J.L., Rojas-
Ledesma, J., Soto, A.: Worst-case optimal graph joins in almost
no space. In: Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on
Management of Data. pp. 102–114 (2021)
9. Athanassoulis,M.,Idreos,S.:Designtradeoffsofdataaccessmeth-
ods. In: SIGMOD. pp. 2195–2200 (2016)
10. Athanassoulis,M.,Kester,M.S.,Maas,L.M.,Stoica,R.,Idreos,S.,
Ailamaki,A.,Callaghan,M.:Designingaccessmethods:theRUM
conjecture. In: EDBT. pp. 461–466 (2016)
11. Atre, M., Srinivasan, J., Hendler, J.A.: BitMat: a main-memory
bit matrix of RDF triples for conjunctive triple pattern queries. In:
ISWC (Posters & Demonstrations). pp. 1–2 (2008)
12. Bausch, D., Petrov, I., Buchmann, A.: Making cost-based query
optimization asymmetry-aware. In: Proceedings of the Workshop
on Data Management on New Hardware. pp. 24–32 (2012)
13. Bebee, B.R., Choi, D., Gupta, A., Gutmans, A., Khandelwal, A.,
Kiran, Y., Mallidi, S., McGaughy, B., Personick, M., Rajan, K.,
Rondelli,S.,Ryazanov,A.,Schmidt,M.,Sengupta,K.,Thompson,
B.B., Vaidya, D., Wang, S.: Amazon neptune: graph data manage-
ment in the cloud. In: ISWC (Posters & Demonstrations). (2018)
14. Besta, M., Peter, E., Gerstenberger, R., Fischer, M., Pod-
stawski, M., Barthels, C., Alonso, G., Hoeﬂer, T.: Demystifying
graph databases: analysis and taxonomy of data organization,
system designs, and graph queries. Technical Report. (2019)
arXiv:1910.09017
15. Bishop, B., Kiryakov, A., Ognyanoff, D., Peikov, I., Tashev, Z.,
Velkov, R.: OWLIM: a family of scalable semantic repositories.
Semantic Web 2(1), 33–42 (2011)
16. Bonifati, A., Martens, W., Timm, T.: An analytical study of large
SPARQL query logs. VLDB J. 29(2), 655–679 (2020)
17. Bornea,M.A.,Dolby,J.,Kementsietsidis,A.,Srinivas,K.,Dantres-
sangle, P., Udrea, O., Bhattacharjee, B.: Building an efﬁcient RDF
storeoverarelationaldatabase.In:SIGMOD. pp.121–132 (2013)
18. Brisaboa,N.R.,Cerdeira-Pena,A.,Fariña,A.,Navarro,G.:Acom-
pactRDFstoreusingsufﬁxarrays.In:Costas,I.,Simon,P.,Emine,
Y.(eds.)StringProcessingandInformationRetrieval,pp.103–115.
Springer, Cham (2015)
19. Chazelle, B., Kilian, J., Rubinfeld, R., Tal, A.: The bloomier ﬁlter:
an efﬁcient data structure for static support lookup tables. In: Pro-
ceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
(SODA). pp. 30–39 (2004)
20. Chong, E.I., Das, S., Eadon, G., Srinivasan, J.: Integrating RDF
data into a relational database system. US Patent US8719250B2
(2014)
21. Cyganiak, R.: A relational algebra for SPARQL query developers
with a powerful tool to extract information from large A relational
algebra for SPARQL. Technical Report, HP Laboratories Bristol,
Bristol, UK (2005)
22. Duan, S., Kementsietsidis, A., Srinivas, K., Udrea, O.: Apples and
oranges:acomparisonofRDFbenchmarksandrealRDFdatasets.
In: SIGMOD. 145–156 (2011)
123

372 T.Sagietal.
23. Erling, O., Averbuch, A., Larriba-Pey, J.-L., Chaﬁ, H., Gubichev,
A., Prat-Pérez, A., Pham, M., Boncz, P.A.: The LDBC Social
Network Benchmark: Interactive Workload. In: SIGMOD. pp.
619–630 (2015)
24. Erling, O., Mikhailov, I.: Virtuoso: RDF support in a native
RDBMS. In: Semantic Web Information Management - A Model-
Based Perspective. Springer, pp. 501–519 (2009)
25. Fernández,J.D.,Martínez-Prieto,M.A.,Gutiérrez,C.,Polleres,A.,
Arias,M.:BinaryRDFrepresentationforpublicationandexchange
(HDT).WebSemant.Sci.Serv.AgentsWorldWideWeb19,22–41
(2013)
26. Ficara, D., Giordano, S., Procissi, G., Vitucci, F.: Multilayer
compressed counting bloom ﬁlters. In: Proceedings of the 27th
Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, pp. 311–315
(2008)
27. Florescu, D., Levy, A., Manolescu, I., Suciu, D.: Query optimiza-
tion in the presence of limited access patterns. In: SIGMOD. pp.
311–322 (1999)
28. Franz Inc. 2020. AllegroGraph. Accessed jan. 14, 2020. https://
franz.com/agraph/allegrograph
29. Frasincar,F.,Houben,G.-J.,Vdovjak,R.,Barna,P.:RAL:analge-
bra for querying RDF. WWW 7(1), 83–109 (2004)
30. Galárraga,L.,Hose,K.,Schenkel,R.:Partout:adistributedengine
for efﬁcient RDF processing. WWW 2014, 267–268 (2014)
31. Gubichev, A., Bedathur, S.J., Seufert, S.: Sparqling kleene: fast
property paths in RDF-3X. In Workshop on Graph Data Manage-
ment Experiences and Systems, GRADES (2013)
32. Guo,Y.,Pan,Z.,Heﬂin,J.:LUBM:AbenchmarkforOWLknowl-
edge base systems. J. Web Sem. 3(2–3), 158–182 (2005)
33. Harris,S.,Gibbins,N.:3store:efﬁcientbulkRDFstorage.In:Pro-
ceedings of the International Workshop on Practical and Scalable
Semantic Systems (PSSS). 1 (2003)
34. Harris, S., Lamb, N., Shadbolt, N.: 4store : The design and imple-
mentation of a clustered RDF store. In: Scalable Semantic Web
Knowledge Base Systems (SSWS). pp. 81–96 (2009)
35. Harris, S.: Andy. Seaborne. 2012. SPARQL 1.1 Query Language.
W3C Recommendation 21 March (2013)
36. Harth,A.,Umbrich,J.,Hogan,A.,Decker,S.:YARS2:Afederated
repository for querying graph structured data from the web. In:
ISWC. pp. 211–224 (2007)
37. Hellerstein, J.M., Stonebraker, M., Hamilton, J.: Architecture of a
database system. Found. Trends Databases 2007, 141–259 (2007)
38. Hogan, A., Riveros, C., Rojas, C., Soto, A.: A worst-case opti-
maljoinalgorithmforSPARQL.In:ISWC.Springer,pp.258–275
(2019)
39. Huffman, D.A.: A method for the construction of minimum-
redundancy codes. Proc. IRE 40(9), 1098–1101 (1952)
40. Idreos,S.,Dayan,N.,Qin,W.,Akmanalp,M.,Hilgard,S.,Ross,A.,
Lennon,J.,Jain,V.,Gupta,H.,Li,D.,Zhu,Z.:Designcontinuums
and the path toward self-designing key-value stores that know and
learn. In: CIDR (2019)
41. Idreos,S.,Zoumpatianos,K.,Hentschel,B.,Kester,M.S.,Guo,D.:
The data calculator: data structure design and cost synthesis from
ﬁrstprinciplesandlearnedcostmodels.In:SIGMOD.pp.535–550
(2018)
42. Kaoudi, Z., Manolescu, I.: RDF in the clouds: a survey. VLDB J.
24(1), 67–91 (2015)
43. Khamis, M.A., Ngo, H.Q., Ré, C., Rudra, A.: Joins via geometric
resolutions: worst case and beyond. ACM Trans. Database Syst.
(TODS) 41(4), 1–45 (2016)
44. Klyne, G., Carrol, J.J., McBride, B.: RDF 1.1 Concepts and
Abstract Syntax. World-Wide Web Consortium (2014)
45. Kolas, D., Emmons, I., Dean, M.: Efﬁcient linked-list RDF index-
ing in Parliament. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Scalable
SemanticWebKnowledgeBaseSystems(SSWS).WashingtonDC,
USA, pp. 17–32 (2009)
46. Krech, D.: RDFlib: A Python Library for Working with RDF.
Accessed jan. 14, (2020). https://rdﬂib.readthedocs.io
47. Lissandrini, M., Brugnara, M., Velegrakis, Y.: Beyond mac-
robenchmarks: microbenchmark-based graph databaseevaluation.
Proc. VLDB Endow. 12(4), 390–403 (2018)
48. Liu, X., Thomsen, C., Pedersen, T.B.: 3XL: supporting efﬁcient
operations on very large OWL Lite triple-stores. Inform. Syst.
36(4), 765–781 (2011)
49. SYSTAP LLC. 2013. The bigdata RDF Database. Techni-
cal Report. SYSTAP LLC. https://blazegraph.com/docs/bigdata_
architecture_whitepaper.pdf
50. Ma, Z., Capretz, M.A.M., Yan, L.: Storing massive resource
description framework (RDF) data: a survey. Knowl. Eng. Rev.
31(4), 391–413 (2016)
51. Menon, P., Mowry, T.C., Pavlo, A.: Relaxed operator fusion
for in-memory databases: making compilation, vectorization, and
prefetchingworktogetheratlast.Proc.VLDBEndow.11(1),1–13
(2017)
52. Modoni, G.E., Sacco, M., Terkaj, W.: A survey of RDF store
solutions.In:ProceedingsoftheConferenceonEngineering,Tech-
nology and Innovation (ICE). pp. 1–7 (2014)
53. Möller, K., Heath, T., Handschuh, S., Domingue, J.: Recipes for
semanticwebdogfood—theESWCandISWCmetadataprojects.
In: ISWC. pp. 802–815 (2007)
54. Muys, A.: Building an enterprise-scale database for RDF data.
Technical Report. The Mulgara Project. (2006) https://code.
mulgara.org/projects/mulgara/wiki/ImperfectIndexes
55. Neumann, T., Weikum, G.: The RDF-3X engine for scalable man-
agement of RDF data. VLDB J. 19(1), 91–113 (2010)
56. Nitta,K.,Savnik,I.:SurveyofRDFstoragemanagers.In:Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Advances in Databases,
Knowledge, and Data Applications. pp. 148–153 (2014)
57. OntoText: GraphDB, The Best RDF Database for Knowledge
Graphs. Accessed jan. 14, (2020). https://www.ontotext.com/
products/graphdb/
58. Owens,Alisdair,Seaborne,Andy,Gibbins,Nick:ClusteredTDB’:
AClusteredTripleStoreforJena.Univ.ofSouthampton,Technical
Report (2009)
59. Özsu, M.T.: A survey of RDF data management systems. Front.
Comput. Sci. 10(3), 418–432 (2016)
60. Pan, Z., Zhu, T., Liu, H., Ning, H.: A survey of RDF manage-
ment technologies and benchmark datasets. J. Ambient Intell. and
Humanized Comput. 9(5), 1693–1704 (2018)
61. Pavlo, A., Angulo, G., Arulraj, J., Lin, H., Lin, J., Ma, L., Menon,
P., Mowry, T.C., Perron, M., Quah, I., Santurkar, S., Tomasic, A.,
Toor, S., Van Aken, D., Wang, Z., Wu, Y., Xian, R., Zhang, T.:
Self-driving database management systems. In: CIDR (2017)
62. Pérez, J., Arenas, M., Gutierrez, C.: Semantics and complexity of
SPARQL. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 34(3), 1–45 (2009)
63. Prud’hommeaux, E., Seaborne, A.: SPARQL Query Language for
RDF. W3C Recommendation 15 January 2008 (2008)
64. Punnoose, R., Crainiceanu, A., Rapp, D.: Rya: A scalable RDF
triple store for the clouds. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on
Cloud Intelligence (Cloud-I). Article 4 (2012)
65. Qu,W.,Wang,X.,Li,J.,Li,X.:Hybridindexesbyexploringtradi-
tionalB-treeandlinearregression.In:InternationalConferenceon
WebInformationSystemsandApplications.Springer,pp.601–613
(2019)
66. Ravindra, P., Kim, H., Anyanwu, K.: An intermediate algebra
for optimizing RDF graph pattern matching on MapReduce. In:
ESWC. pp. 46–61 (2011)
67. Sahoo, S.S., Halb, W., Hellmann, K., Idehen, S., Jr Thibodeau, T.,
Auer,S.,Sequeda,J.,EzzatA.:Asurveyofcurrentapproachesfor
mapping of relational databases to RDF. Technical Report. W3C
RDB2RDF Incubator Group (2009)
123

AdesignspaceforRDFdatarepresentations 373
68. Sakr, S., Al-Naymat, G.: Relational processing of RDF queries: a
survey. SIGMOD Record 38(4), 23–28 (2009)
69. Saleem, M., Mehmood, Q., Ngonga Ngomo, A.-C.: FEASIBLE:
a feature-based SPARQL benchmark generation framework. In:
ISWC. pp. 52–69 (2015)
70. Saleem, M., Szárnyas, G., Conrads, F., Ahmad Chan Bukhari, S.,
Mehmood,Q.,Ngomo,A.-C.N.:HowrepresentativeIsaSPARQL
benchmark? An analysis of RDF Triplestore benchmarks. In:
WWW. pp. 1623–1633 (2019)
71. Schmidt, M., Hornung, T., Meier, M., Pinkel, C., Lausen, G.:
SP2Bench:aSPARQLperformancebenchmark.In:SemanticWeb
Information Management - A Model-Based Perspective. Springer,
pp. 371–393 (2009)
72. Grifﬁths Selinger, P., Astrahan, M.M., Chamberlin, D.D., Lorie,
R.A., Price, T.G.: Access path selection in a relational database
management system. In: SIGMOD, pp. 23–34. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1979)
73. Sintek, M., Kiesel, M.: RDFBroker: a signature-based high-
performance RDF store. In: ESWC. pp. 363–377 (2006)
74. Stardog Union. (2020). Stardog. Accessed jan. 14, 2020. https://
www.stardog.com/
75. Talmor,A.,Berant,J.:Thewebasaknowledge-baseforanswering
complex questions. In: NAACL-HLT. pp. 641–651 (2018)
76. Urbani, J., Jacobs, C.: Adaptive low-level storage of very large
knowledge graphs. In: Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020
(Taipei,Taiwan)(WWW’20).AssociationforComputingMachin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1761–1772. (2020) https://doi.org/
10.1145/3366423.3380246
77. Vidal, M.-E., Ruckhaus, E., Lampo, T., Martínez, A., Sierra, J.,
Polleres,A.:EfﬁcientlyjoininggrouppatternsinSPARQLqueries.
In: Extended Semantic Web Conference. Springer, pp. 228–242
(2010)
78. Volz, R., Oberle, D., Staab, S., Motik, B.: KAON SERVER - a
semantic web management system. In: WWW. online (2003)
79. Vrandeˇci´c,D.,Krötzsch,M.:Wikidata:afreecollaborativeknowl-
edgebase. Commun. ACM 57(10), 78–85 (2014)
80. Wang,Y.,Xiaoyong,D.,Jiaheng,L.,Wang,X.:FlexTable:usinga
dynamicrelationmodeltostoreRDFdata.In:DatabaseSystemsfor
Advanced Applications (DASFAA), pp. 580–594. Tsukuba, Japan
(2010)
81. Weiss, C., Karras, P., Bernstein, A.: Hexastore: sextuple indexing
for semantic web data management. Proc. VLDB Endow. 1(1),
1008–1019 (2008)
82. Wolff, B.G.J., Fletcher, G.H.L., Lu, J.J.: An extensible framework
forqueryoptimizationonTripleT-basedRDFstores.In:Workshops
of EDBT/ICDT. pp. 190–196 (2015)
83. Wu,H.,Fujiwara,T.,Yamamoto,Y.,Bolleman,J.,Yamaguchi,A.:
BioBenchmark Toyama 2012: an evaluation of the performance of
triplestoresonbiologicaldata.J.Biomed.Semant.5(1),32(2014)
84. Zhe W., Moreno, G.M., Banerjee, J.: Storing and querying graph
data in a key-value store. US Patent US20140310302A1 (2014)
85. Wylot, M., Hauswirth, M., Cudré-Mauroux, P., Sakr, S.: RDF data
storage and query processing schemes: a survey. ACM Comput.
Surv. 51(4), 36 (2018)
86. Yakovets,N.,Godfrey,P.,Gryz,J.:EvaluationofSPARQLproperty
paths via recursive SQL. AMW 1087 (2013)
87. Yuan, P., Liu, P., Wu, B., Jin, H., Zhang, W., Liu, L.: TripleBit: a
fast and compact system for large scale RDF data. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 6(7), 517–528 (2013)
88. Zeng, L., Zou, L.: Redesign of the gStore system. Front. Comput.
Sci. 12(4), 623–641 (2018)
89. Zhang, H., Andersen, D.G., Pavlo, A., Kaminsky, M., Ma, L.,
Shen, R.: Reducing the storage overhead of main-memory OLTP
databases with hybrid indexes. In: SIGMOD. pp. 1567–1581
(2016)
90. Zhang, H., Lim,H., Leis,V., Andersen, D.G., Kaminsky, M., Kee-
ton, K., Pavlo, A.: Surf: Practical range query ﬁltering with fast
succinct tries. In: SIGMOD. pp. 323–336 (2018)
91. Zhang, J., Wu, S., Tan, Z., Chen, G., Cheng, Z., Cao, W., Gao, Y.,
Feng, X.: S3: a scalable in-memory skip-list index for key-value
store. Proc. VLDB Endow. 12(12), 2183–2194 (2019)
Publisher’sNote Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123