Haystack: A Platform for Creating, Organizing and
Visualizing Information Using RDF
David Huynh
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
200 Technology Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
1 (617) 452-5041
dfhuynh@ai.mit.edu
David Karger
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science
200 Technology Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
1 (617) 258-6167
karger@theory.lcs.mit.edu
Dennis Quan
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
200 Technology Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
IBM Internet Technology Division
1 Rogers Street
Cambridge, MA 02142
1 (617) 693-4612
dquan@media.mit.edu 
ABSTRACT
The Resource Definition Framework (RDF) is designed to support
agent communication on the Web, but it is also suitable as a
framework for modeling and storing personal information.
Haystack is a personalized information repository that employs
RDF in this manner. This flexible semistructured data model is
appealing for several reasons. First, RDF supports ontologies
created by the user and tailored to the user’s needs. At the same
time, system ontologies can be specified and evolved to support a
variety of high-level functionalities such as flexible organization
schemes, semantic querying, and collaboration. In addition, we
show that RDF can be used to engineer a component architecture
that gives rise to a semantically rich and uniform user interface.
We demonstrate that by aggregating various types of users’ data
together in a homogeneous representation, we create opportunities
for agents to make more informed deductions in automating tasks
for users. Finally, we discuss the implementation of an RDF
information store and a programming language specifically suited
for manipulating RDF. 
1. INTRODUCTION
The Resource Definition Framework (RDF) has been developed
to provide interoperability between applications that exchange
machine-understandable information on the Web [6]. In other
words, RDF is well-suited for facilitating Web Services in
resource discovery, cataloging, content rating, and privacy
policies. 
Of course, the expressive power of RDF is more far-reaching than
just agent communication. We postulate that RDF can be well
exploited for managing users’ information. The semistructured
nature of RDF lends itself well to the heterogeneous disposition of
personal information corpora. In addition, since RDF provides a
standard, platform-neutral means for exchanging metadata, it
naturally facilitates sophisticated features such as annotation and
collaboration. In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a
personal information management system that employs RDF as its
primary data model.
1.1 Motivation
The goal of the Haystack project is to develop a tool that allows
users to easily manage their documents, e-mail messages,
appointments, tasks, and other information. Haystack is designed
to address four specific expectations of the user. 
First, the user should be allowed maximum flexibility in how he
or she chooses to describe and organize his or her information.
The system should allow the user to structure his or her data in the
most suitable fashion as perceived by the user. Section 2
elaborates on Haystack’s support for user-defined ontologies.
Second, the system should not create artificial distinctions
between different types of information that would seem unnatural
to the user. This point is related to the previous point in that the
system should not partition a corpus simply because different
programs are used to manipulate different parts of that corpus.
Rather, the system should store all of the user’s information in one
homogeneous representation and allow the user to impose
semantics that partition the data appropriately.
Third, the system should allow the user to easily manipulate and
visualize his or her information in ways appropriate to the task at
hand. The user interface should be aware of the context in which
arbitrary information is being displayed and should present an
appropriate amount of detail. We address these issues later in
Section 3 where we discuss Haystack’s user interface.
Fourth, the user should be able to delegate certain information
processing tasks to agents. Regardless of how powerful a user
interface we provide, there will still be many repetitive tasks
facing users, and we feel that users will benefit from automation.
The details of Haystack’s agent infrastructure are given in Section
4.
1.2 Contribution
By addressing these four needs, we show that Haystack is able to
use RDF to extend several profound benefits to users. First, RDF
can be readily exploited to add semantics to existing information
management frameworks and to serve as a lingua franca between
different corpora. On top of this, we provide an ontology that 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission by the authors. 
Semantic Web Workshop 2002 Hawaii, USA
Copyright by the authors 

 supports capabilities including collection-based organization,
semantic categorization, and collaboration and trust management.
By ontology we are referring to a vocabulary that specifies a set of
classes and the properties possessed by objects of these classes.
This ontology enables the user interface to present the user’s
information in a meaningful manner, and it also provides an
abstraction on which agents can run.
Next, we show that RDF can be used to describe the means for
visualizing heterogeneous data. In addition to the obvious
registration metadata found in all component frameworks, RDF
can be used to build user interface specification abstractions that
can be directly manipulated by the user just as other metadata.
This capability opens many doors for user interface engineering
including the realization of a truly uniform interface. 
Finally, we discuss the use of RDF for modeling imperative
computational processes. We present a language called Adenine
as a natural means for manipulating metadata and thus writing
agents for Haystack. Adenine programs compile into an RDF
representation, affording them the same ability to be annotated,
distributed, and customized as other documents and information. 
1.3 History
The information overload problem has become more and more
evident in the past decade, driving the need for better information
management tools. Several research projects have been initiated to
address this issue. The Haystack project [8] [9] was started in
1997 to investigate possible solutions to this very problem. It aims
to create a powerful platform for information management. Since
its creation, the project has sought a data modeling framework
suitable for storing and manipulating a heterogeneous corpus of
metadata in parallel with a user’s documents. With the
introduction of RDF, a good match was found between the
versatility and expressiveness of RDF and the primary need of
Haystack to manage metadata. The project has recently been
reincarnated to make use of RDF as its primary data model.
1.4 Related Work
There have been numerous efforts to augment the user’s data with
metadata. The Placeless Documents project at Xerox PARC [3]
developed an architecture for storing documents based on
properties specified by the user and by the system. Like Haystack,
Placeless Documents supported arbitrary properties on objects and
a collection mechanism for aggregating documents. It also
specified in its schema access control attributes and shared
properties useful for collaboration. The Placeless Documents
architecture leveraged existing storage infrastructure (e.g. web
servers, file systems, databases, IMAP, etc.) through a driver
layer. Similarly, Haystack takes advantage of the same storage
infrastructure, using URLs to identify documents.
On the surface, the main difference between Placeless’
architecture and Haystack’s is the adaptation of RDF as a standard
for information storage and exchange. Although Haystack and
Placeless share a lot of similarities in the data model layer,
Haystack takes a more ambitious approach to the user interface
problem. Placeless’ Presto user interface focused on facilitating
management of data in general using a predetermined set of
interfaces. In developing Haystack, we are experimenting with
ways to incorporate the customization of user interfaces into the
bigger problem of personalized information management by
providing a platform upon which user interfaces can be modeled
and manipulated with the same facility as other metadata.
There are other systems, many in common use today, that permit
arbitrary metadata annotations on files. The Windows NT file
system (NTFS) supports file system-level user-definable
attributes. WebDAV [2], a distributed HTTP-based content
management system, also permits attributes on documents. Lotus
Notes and Microsoft Exchange, two common knowledge
management server solutions, both support custom attributes on
objects within their databases. However, the metadata are not
readily interchangeable among different environments. Further,
the structure of metadata in these systems is highly constrained
and makes the expression of complex relationships between
objects difficult. For example, these systems do not have first
class support for making assertions about predicates, making it
difficult for the user interface and agents to analyze data
conforming to a foreign ontology dynamically.
The Semantic Web project at the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C), like Haystack, is using RDF to address these issues of
interchangeability [4]. The focus of the Semantic Web effort is to
proliferate RDF-formatted metadata throughout the Internet in
much the same fashion that HTML has been proliferated by the
popularity of web browsers. By building agents that are capable of
consuming RDF, data from multiple sources can be combined in
ways that are presently impractical. The simplest examples
involve resolving scheduling problems between different systems
running different calendaring servers but both speaking RDF. A
more complex example is one where a potential car buyer can
make automated comparisons of different cars showcased on
vendors' web sites because the car data is in RDF. Haystack is
designed to work within the framework of the Semantic Web.
However, the focus is on aggregating data from users' lives as
well as from the Semantic Web into a personalized repository.
2. DESCRIBING AND ORGANIZING
HETEROGENEOUS INFORMATION
In this section we examine strategies for managing a
heterogeneous corpus. First we examine how users can define
objects using their own ontology. Then we discuss one means for
aggregating objects—the collection—and how it is used in
Haystack to help users organize their information. 
2.1 Personalized Ontologies
One of Haystack’s objectives is to facilitate the use of an ontology
for organizing, manipulating and retrieving personal information.
Some classes will be defined in the system ontology, such as those
used for describing queries and collections of objects. Also, some
properties, such as title, language, and description, will be defined
by standard ontologies such as the Dublin Core. Other classes and
properties can be defined by the user to suit his or her own
organization method. 
On the surface, the Haystack model may not seem very different
from those of current systems. Programs such as Lotus Notes and
Microsoft Outlook support classes such as e-mail message,
contact, and appointment and provide default properties, including
subject, from, and date. However, whereas the focus of these
products is in providing an efficient and user-friendly means for
maintaining objects with these standardized schemata, Haystack
attempts to facilitate the entry of data using the user’s own class
definitions. This functionality is typically found in relational
database products, where users first specify a structured schema
that describes the data they are entering before populating the
table. In reality however, schema design is usually left for 

 database and system administrators, who circulate their designs
toward end users of Notes or Outlook.
This “one size fits all” approach for schema design is far from
perfect. End users are a fundamentally diverse populace, and
people often have their own ideas of what attributes to store for
particular classes of objects. A good example is an address book.
Some people only care about storing one or two phone numbers
and a mailing address, while sales managers may be concerned
with a breakdown of all past contact with a customer as well as
important dates in the customer’s life, such as his or her birthday.
The current approach of making more and more fields built-in to
an address book product is problematic. Software adopting this
approach is often overloading to the user who just wants a simple
address book, yet perhaps not functional enough for the sales
manager. Using a personal database such as Microsoft Access or
FileMaker Pro only aggravates this problem, since users are
forced to rebuild their address books from generic templates and
generic data types.
To solve this mismatch problem, we must examine means for
describing per-user customization. Technologies such as RDF
provide flexible data frameworks upon which customized schema
definitions and metadata can be specified. RDF’s data model
encourages the creation of custom vocabularies for describing the
relationships between different objects. Furthermore, RDF’s XML
syntax makes these personalized vocabulary specifications
portable between different systems. This will be important for
allowing agents to enhance the user’s information, as is discussed
later.
The challenge exists in how to bring this ability to customize a
personal information store to the end user who has no experience
with database administration. To accomplish this, we have
devised tools for helping people manipulate unstructured, semi-
structured, and structured data, abstracting the details of schema
management from end users. These tools are built upon a flexible,
semi-structured RDF data store that Haystack uses to manage
users’ information according to ontologies they choose. 
We generalize the problem of editing data based on arbitrary
ontologies by providing a generic metadata editor. This editor
takes advantage of the RDF Schema [7] data within Haystack’s
RDF store in order to present the user with a useful interface to
their data. Future versions will allow users to assign arbitrary
properties (not just those specified by the schema) to objects by
simply typing the name of the property and its value. In this way
users need not be conscientious about schemata, and incidental
properties specific to one object and not to the class can be
entered.
A customized view of an object will often provide a better
interface to the user than a generic tool, when one is available. To
support this we provide a sophisticated platform for describing
these customizations in our prototype user interface tool called
Ozone, discussed in Section 3.
In addition to editing properties of specific objects, it is often
useful to the user to be able to manipulate the relationship
between objects. A graph editor allows users to see a collection of
objects and add and/or remove relationships between these
objects. This idea has been popularized in tools such as Microsoft
Visio, where structures such as flow charts, organization charts,
and business processes can be modeled in a similar fashion.
Further, tools for drawing semantic diagrams by making
connections between concepts have become available. The
Haystack graph editor provides these functionalities to the user
but records this data in RDF, making the semantic diagrams true
representations of “live” data.
2.2 Classifying Information
While users may be interested in customizing how their contact
information is stored in their address books, some abstractions we
argue are best defined by the base system. This prevents the user
from being too bogged down with details of semantic modeling,
while providing the user with out-of-the-box functionality. Here
we discuss one of these key classes, Collection.
A big problem with many document management systems,
including paper-based ones, is the inability to conveniently file
documents in more than one category. Although hierarchical
folders are a useful and efficient means for storing documents, the
hierarchical folder system presents challenges to users who
attempt to use it to categorize documents. Does a document
named “Network Admin Department Budget for 2001” belong in
the “Budget” folder, the “2001” folder, or the “Network Admin”
folder? Supposing an individual finds justification for placing it in
just one of these folders, it is very possible that other users may
have different views on classification and expect the document to
be in a different folder. It may also be the case that some days a
user will be interested in a time-based classification and other
days a department-based classification. 
Simply supporting files being in more than one folder at once is
not sufficient. Commonly used modern operating environments
such as Windows and MacOS already provide mechanisms (called
“shortcuts” and “aliases” respectively) for placing objects in more
than one folder. On UNIX systems users can create hard links to
files in more than one directory at once. However, we find
relatively little use of these features for simultaneously classifying
documents into multiple categories. 
We postulate that this is because the user interface does not
encourage simultaneous classification. How many programs can
be found whose file save feature prompts the user for all the
possible directories into which to place a file? Many users place
their files into a single directory because they are not willing to
expend the effort to classify files. Of the fraction that are willing,
there is yet a smaller fraction who would be willing to save their
files in one place, then go to the shell to create the hard links into
the other directories.
Collections, like folders, are aggregations of objects; an object
may be a member of more than one collection, unlike folders,
whose interface encourages a strict containment relationship
between folders and objects. This flexible system for grouping
objects together is an important tool for allowing users to organize
objects in any way they choose.
Throughout the Haystack user interface, we provide simple
facilities for specifying membership in more than one collection.
Of course, we support direct manipulation schemes such as drag
and drop between collections. However, as noted earlier, the
system must itself facilitate the placement of objects in multiple
collections in order to be useful. For example, Haystack generates
collections to store the results of queries. Whereas in some
systems, such as Microsoft Outlook, first class membership in
multiple collections is only supported when the collection is a
search result set, this functionality is supported naturally within 

 Haystack. Still, we envision the greatest source of multiple
classification will be from agents automatically categorizing
documents for the user. 
3. SEMANTIC USER INTERFACE
In addition to modeling data, RDF is used as the medium for
specifying Haystack’s user interface and how Haystack presents
the user’s data. Haystack’s prototype user interface, named
Ozone, uses a custom component architecture, and the user
interface is constructed dynamically at runtime based on
metadata. In this section, we introduce this metadata-based
component architecture, show how it helps construct a uniform
user interface, and describe the benefits such an interface might
bring.
3.1 Component Architecture
The Ozone user interface is constructed from a conglomeration of
parts. An Ozone part is a code-backed component that can
contribute to the user interface in some way. Attributes of each
part are provided in metadata. In particular, the part’s
implementation, the types of data it can render, and the
functionality it provides are described.
3.1.1 Types of Parts
There are four types of parts: layout parts, informative parts,
decorative parts, and view parts. Layout parts are responsible for
segmenting the visual display into distinct spaces and for
positioning other parts in these spaces. Informative parts present
textual and graphical information to the user. Decorative parts
provide decorations such as white margins, line dividers, text
spacing, list separators, etc. Finally, view parts use layout parts,
informative parts, and decorative parts as building blocks in
constructing a unified view of a single object to the user. 
Figure 1. Example of different types of parts working together
Figure 1 shows an example of how the various types of parts work
together to present a meeting. Part (a) of the figure shows the end
result while part (b) shows the internal wiring. The view part
responsible for displaying the meeting employs a vertically
splitting layout part to partition the display into two rows: the top
row embeds an informative part that renders the title of the
meeting; the bottom row contains the details of the meeting. The
bottom row in turn contains a stacking layout part that stacks the
three fields “Time,” “Location,” and “Attendees” vertically.
The “Location” field consists of a decorative part that renders the
label “Location:” and a view part that displays the room where the
meeting is held. Note that because the room is a separate entity,
the meeting view part does not attempt to present the room itself
but rather employs another view part specialized to present the
room. (The room is a separate entity because it has been modeled
as a resource rather than as a literal property of the meeting.) The
room view part includes an informative part to display the room’s
title “Room 102,” two decorative parts to show the parentheses,
and yet another view part to display the building where the room
is located.
The “Attendees” field consists of a decorative part that renders the
label “Attendees:” and a view part that shows the collection of
attendees. The collection view part uses a list layout that positions
the collection members sequentially, with decorative parts
showing comma and “and” separators in between. The collection
members are rendered by their own appropriate view parts.
Note that each view part is responsible for displaying exactly one
semantic entity. In Figure 1, there are seven distinct semantic
entities: the meeting, the room, the building, the attendee
collection, and the three individual attendees. If a semantic entity
is related to other semantic entities, the view part for that entity
may incidentally embed view parts for the other entities. The
parent view part determines the appropriate type of each child
view part to embed, so that the nested presentation looks pleasing.
For instance, a small parent view part embeds only small child
view parts.
3.1.2 Part Metadata
Given a semantic entity to present, Ozone queries the RDF store
for the part suitable for displaying the entity. Figure 2 shows an
example of the metadata that links the entity to the suitable part.
In order to display the hs:favorites entity, Ozone queries for any
view instance associated with the entity through the hs:view
predicate.1 If no view instance is found, Ozone determines the
type of the entity (in this case, hs:Collection) and the view class
corresponding to that type (ozone:ListView). Ozone then
instantiates a unique resource that serves as a view instance for
the hs:favorites entity and asserts that the view instance is of that
view class type. The view instance will be persisted thereafter and
it will serve to store custom settings applied by the user while
viewing the corresponding semantic entity. In this example, such
settings include the columns and their order in the list view. Each
type of view instances persists its settings in its own custom
ontology. 
1 The hs: prefix denotes a URI belonging to the Haystack
namespace. Note that the idea of views is inherent to the
Haystack ontology, whereas the view parts used to display them
are inherent to Ozone. 

  Figure 2. Part metadata example
Once a view instance exists and its view class is known, Ozone
queries for a part whose view domain (ozone:viewDomain) is the
class of the given view instance. In this example, the part
ozone:listViewPart is found. Ozone then finds the implementation
of this part, instantiates the corresponding Java class, and
initializes it with the semantic entity.
3.1.3 Benefits
The ability to encode the user interface in metadata and then
render the interface from that metadata is appealing for a number
of reasons. First, it allows the component architecture to construct
the user interface dynamically at run-time; any change made to
the metadata can be applied immediately. This is not possible with
conventional user interface programming models for which user
interface layouts are compiled into binary resources or code and
loaded at runtime. Any change to such layouts requires
recompilation unless the code is specifically parameterized to
accept runtime customization. Even in rapid application
development tools like Microsoft Visual Basic in which user
interfaces can be built by drag and drop operations, there are two
distinct edit and runtime modes. The user is only allowed to
interact with the application in runtime mode when the user
interface is already fixed and unchangeable. Skinnable
applications also have a similar limitation. Skins are made by skin
designers and then published to users. The users can select which
skins to apply to the applications, but they cannot customize the
skins themselves. Again, there are two distinct design and use
modes that deny the users the power of customizing the user
interfaces themselves. Likewise, web pages have two edit and
view modes: in view mode, the user cannot make modifications.
Our Ozone interface architecture imposes no such modes and
allows the user to make changes to the user interface at runtime.
Note that user interface changes performed by the user are high-
level: they are to programmers’ user interface work as interior
design is to carpentry. In other words, customizing the user
interface is akin to editing a word processing document or
manipulating a spreadsheet. The user is allowed to arrange parts
and apply visual themes over them; all the necessary “carpentry
work” is handled automatically by Ozone. Since arguably there is
no universal interface that suits the needs of every user, this
ability to customize one’s user interface is desirable. In fact, such
personalization features have been explored in simple forms on
several portal web sites like http://my.yahoo.com. We would like
to bring personalization to our information management platform.
In addition to arranging pre-installed parts, the user is offered to
select new parts from a part repository and drag them to desired
locations in the Ozone interface.
One might argue that similar component architectures and
personalization engines have been implemented without the need
for RDF. In fact, anything implemented using RDF can be done
with custom formats. However, what RDF offers is a unified and
extensible framework much needed in the presence of several
incompatible custom formats.
The second benefit of user interface metadata is that, like any
other type of data, the user interface metadata can be saved,
published, and shared. The ability to publish user interface
metadata is particularly attractive. Consider a scenario in which a
new employee enters a company with a large intranet. This
intranet offers countless useful resources to the new employee, but
because of its sheer volume, it is intimidating to get used to.
Fortunately, other employees have over time collected a selection
of Ozone parts that provide access to the most useful features of
the intranet. The new employee can simply make use of these
parts as a starting point. These parts are brought into the
employee’s Haystack and tailored based on his or her preferences.
These parts can interact with the employee’s Haystack and
perform automatic customization that makes Haystack much more
powerful than a static web page listing a set of useful links to the
intranet.
User interfaces, hence, can be evolved by the users for themselves
as their needs emerge and coalesce. Users with different needs
tailor their interfaces differently. Those with similar needs share
their interface layouts. This philosophy relieves the interface
designers from the impossible task of making universal interfaces
that satisfy both expert and novice users. Instead, we provide tools
for the user to tailor his or her own user interface. In addition, by
providing an ontology describing user interface interactions, such
interactions can be tracked automatically and agents can apply
machine learning algorithms to better fit the user interface to the
user’s implicit needs and preferences.
The third benefit of user interface metadata is that the user
interface designer is encouraged to think semantically as he or she
encodes the interface in metadata. Since the interface is rendered
automatically by the component architecture based on a unified
set of semantics, the barrier to creating user interfaces is much
lowered. By removing the burden of fiddling with the interface
“until it works” or “so it looks nice,” we encourage the designer to
think at the level of the user’s semantics rather than at the level of
how the user interface is syntactically constructed. Such 

 abstraction leads to consistency, the most advocated property of
user interface [10].
Finally, because the user interface is modeled in RDF just as the
user’s data is, the tools offered by Ozone for allowing the user to
manipulate his or her data are the same as those used when
manipulating the interface itself. For example, the mechanism for
changing a contact’s name is also used for changing the caption of
a button. The mechanism for changing the font in an email
message body can be used to change the font in which all labels
are displayed. In fact, the mechanism for looking up a word in the
body of a document is made available for looking up a menu
command that one does not understand. This uniform fashion in
which all things can be manipulated makes the interface of Ozone
consistent and hence, natural and powerful.
3.2 Uniform User Interface
Using the power of the component architecture, we explore the
concept of a uniform user interface [10]. In such an interface, any
two user interface elements that look semantically identical to the
user afford the same set of actions regardless of context. For
instance, a contact name shown in the “From” column for an
email message in a list view (Figure 3) should expose the same
actions as the same contact name shown in the “From” text field
in the email message window (Figure 4). In Microsoft Outlook
XP and other existing email clients, those two elements provide
almost entirely different sets of actions. The former element is a
dead text string painted as part of the whole list view item
representing the email message. Right-clicking on it is equivalent
to right-clicking anywhere in that list view item. The same context
menu for the whole message is always shown regardless of the
right-click location. The latter element is a control by itself. It
represents a contact object and shows the context menu applicable
to that object when right-clicked. To the user, both elements
represent the same contact object and should give the same
context menu. (Uniformity in this case implies modelessness.) 
Figure 3. Actions for a contact name in a list view 
(Microsoft Outlook XP) 
Figure 4. Actions for a contact name in the email compose
window (Microsoft Outlook XP)
Context menus have been adopted by most operating systems as
the mechanism to query for actions applicable to the indicated
object. However, context menus are rarely used consistently
throughout any user interface. Some user interface elements
afford context menus while others do not. Furthermore, some
context menus do not expose all possible actions that the user
associates semantically with their corresponding objects. Their
inconsistency and incompleteness make context menus less
powerful, and hence, less useful and less widely adopted by users
than they should be. We aim to fix such inconsistency and
incompleteness by providing context menus for all user interface
elements and by systematically constructing the menus from
metadata.2 We believe that this uniformity will make the interface
much easier to use.
In order to construct context menus from metadata, we first note
that every pixel on the screen corresponds to a particular Ozone
part that renders that pixel. If that part is a view part, there is a
corresponding semantic entity that it is responsible for displaying.
That view part can be contained in other outer view parts. All of
these view parts together specify a collection of semantic entities
that underlie the pixel. We postulate that one of these semantic
entities is the thing with which the user wants to interact. To
construct a context menu when that pixel is right-clicked, we
simply list all actions applicable to those semantic entities.
Like semantic entities, Ozone parts can also afford actions. For
instance, the informative part that displays the text “Vineet Sinha”
in Figure 3 allows the user to copy its text. The layout part that
shows the messages in a list view format allows the user to
reorder the columns.
Figure 5 gives a sample context menu that will be implemented
for an upcoming release. The menu is divided into several
sections, each listing the commands for a particular semantic
entity or Ozone part. The email author entity named “Vineet
Sinha” is given the first section. The email message entity is given
the next section. Finally the text label used to display the contact’s
name is given the third section. Commands for other semantic                                                                 
2  Context menus are not widely adopted also because they are not
currently discoverable. Once discovered, they are very
memorable. We propose labeling the right mouse button “Show
Commands” to make context menus more discoverable. 

 entities and parts can be accessed through the “More…” item at
the bottom of the menu. This is only an example of how context
menus can be constructed. The exact order of the sections will be
optimized by user study and feedback. 
Figure 5. Sample context menu
Of note in Figure 5 are some capabilities not provided in existing
email clients. In particular, the “Text” section in the menu offers
ways to copy, look up, and spell-check an otherwise dead piece of
text. In other email clients, only text inside email bodies can be
spell-checked. One can also imagine the usefulness of spell-
checking file names [10] and email subjects.
It is arguable that when a user interface element is associated with
several semantic entities and parts, its context menu will be
overloaded. We believe that with proper modeling of
prioritization of commands and in-depth user study, we can
heuristically select the most useful commands to list in the menu.
Other commands are still accessible through “More…” links.
Further, because menu commands are simply members of the
collection of all actions applicable to some semantic entity, the
user can use the mechanism provided by Ozone for browsing and
searching collections to locate particular menu commands. In
existing software, menu commands can only be found by visual
scans.
4. AGENT INFRASTRUCTURE
We now turn our attention to agents, which play an important role
in not only improving the user experience with regards to keeping
information organized, but also in performing tedious tasks or
well-defined processes for the user. We also describe some
underlying infrastructure needed to make writing and using agents
in Haystack efficient and secure.
4.1 Agents
In the past, programs that aggregated data from multiple sources,
such as mail merge or customer relationship management, had to
be capable of speaking numerous protocols with different back-
ends to generate their results. With a rich corpus of information
such as that present in a user’s Haystack, the possibility for
automation becomes significant because agents can now be
written against a single unified abstraction. Furthermore, agents
can be written to help users deal with information overload by
extracting key information from e-mail messages and other
documents and presenting the user with summaries.
As we alluded to earlier, collections can be maintained
automatically by agents. Modern information retrieval algorithms
are capable of grouping documents by similarity or other metrics,
and previous work has found these automatic classifications to be
useful in many situations. Additionally, users can build collections
prescriptively by making a query. An agent, armed with a
specification of what a user is looking for, can create a collection
from the results of a query, and it can watch for new data entering
the system that matches the query. 
For example, agents can automatically filter a user’s e-mail for
documents that appear to fit in one or more collections defined by
the user, such as “Website Project” or “Letters from Mom”.
Because membership in collections is not one-to-one, this
classification can occur even while the message remains in the
user’s inbox.
Agents are used in Haystack to automatically retrieve and process
information from various sources, such as e-mail, calendars, the
World Wide Web, etc. Haystack includes agents that retrieve e-
mail from POP3 servers, extract plaintext from HTML pages,
generate text summaries, perform text-based classification,
download RSS subscriptions on a regular basis, fulfill queries, and
interface with the file system and LDAP servers.
The core agents are mostly written in Java, but some are written in
Python. We utilize an RDF ontology derived from WSDL [5] for
describing the interfaces to agents as well as for noting which
server processes hosts which agents. As a consequence, we are
able to support different protocols for communicating between
agents, from simply passing in-process Java objects around to
using HTTP-based RPC mechanisms such as HTTP POST and
SOAP [1].
4.2 Belief
When multiple agents are used to generate the same information,
issues arise as to how to deal with conflicts. For instance, if one
agent is tasked with determining the due date of a document by
using natural language processing and another agent does the
same by extracting the first date from a document, which is to be
believed when there is a conflict? In instances such as this, it is
important that information be tagged with authorship metadata so
the user can make an informed choice of which statement to
choose. 
To accomplish this we discuss a part of the system ontology that
is used for describing attributes about actual statements
themselves, such as who asserted them and when they were
asserted. Under the premise that only three values, namely
subject, predicate, and object, are required to describe statements
in our model, it is possible to give statements identifiers and to
assert an author and creation time to the original statement. In
fact, the RDF model prescribes that in order to make statements
about statements, the referent statement must be reified into a 

 resource and assigned a URI, and the referring statements can
then use the reified resource in the subject or object field. 
This use of reification brings up a subtle issue concerning RDF. In
a document containing RDF, it is assumed that all statements are
asserted to be true by the author. In order to make a statement
about another statement that the author does not necessarily
believe is true, the target statement must exist only in reified form.
In essence, the author is binding a name to a specific statement
with a certain subject, predicate, and object, but is not asserting
the statement to be true, only instead asserting other properties
about that statement using the name. 
Keeping track of various levels of trustworthiness is important in
a system that contains statements made by numerous independent
agents, as well as information from users’ colleagues, friends,
family, solicitors, and clients. In order to maintain metadata on the
statements themselves in an information store, one solution is to
have the information store become a “neutral party”, recording
who said what and when those things were said, but not asserting
their truth. This is accomplished by having all statements made by
parties other than the information store reified. (An alternative is
to have one entity—perhaps the user--be at the same trust level as
the data store. However, this results in statements made by the
user being handled in one fashion and those made by others
(which have been reified) handled in a different fashion. For
simplicity of implementation, we keep the data store neutral.)
Once we have a system for recording statement metadata, we can
examine issues of retraction, denial, and expiration of assertions,
i.e., statements asserted by specific parties. Consider an example
where an agent is responsible for generating the title property for
web pages. Some web pages, such as those whose contents are
updated daily, have titles that change constantly. Often users want
to be able to locate pages based on whatever it is they remember
about the page. One approach for handling constant mutations in
the information store is to allow agents to delete a previous
assertion and to replace it with an up-to-date version. However, it
would be powerful to allow users to make queries of the form
“Show me all web pages that had the title Tips for Maintaining
Your Car at some point in time.” By allowing agents to retract
their assertions, queries can still be made to retrieve past or
obsolete information because this information is not deleted.
Additionally, this system permits users to override an assertion
made by an agent by denying the assertion, yet retains the denied
assertion for future reference. 
In a system such as this where multiple parties and agents provide
information, we are often concerned with impersonation and
forgery. To solve these problems, we propose supporting digitally
signed RDF. The digital signature permits the information store to
determine and verify the author of statements with certainty. In an
ideal system, users and agents sign all RDF they produce with
assigned digital signatures. However, the W3C is still working on
the details of supporting signed RDF at the statement level, and
the implementation of a digital signature system is beyond the
scope of this project. For our current prototype, identifier strings
are used in place of true signatures.
4.3 Adenine
In a system such as Haystack, a sizeable amount of code is
devoted to creation and manipulation of RDF-encoded metadata.
We observed early on that the development of a language that
facilitated the types of operations we frequently perform with
RDF would greatly increase our productivity. As a result, we have
created Adenine. An example snippet of Adenine code is given in 
Figure 6.
The motivation for creating this language is twofold. The first key
feature is making the language’s syntax support the data model.
Introducing the RDF data model into a standard object-oriented
language is fairly straightforward; after all, object-oriented
languages were designed specifically to be extensible in this
fashion. Normally, one creates a class library to support the
required objects. However, more advanced manipulation
paradigms specific to an object model begin to tax the syntax of
the language. In languages such as C++, C#, and Python, operator
overloading allows programmers to reuse built-in operators for
manipulating objects, but one is restricted to the existing syntax of
the language; one cannot easily construct new syntactic structures.
In Java, operator overloading is not supported, and this results in
verbose APIs being created for any object oriented system.
Arguably, this verbosity can be said to improve the readability of
code. 
On the other hand, lack of syntactic support for a specific object
model can be a hindrance to rapid development. Programs can end
up being three times as long as necessary because of the verbose
syntactic structures used. This is the reason behind the popularity
of domain-specific programming languages, such as those used in
Matlab, Macromedia Director, etc. Adenine is such a language. It
includes native support for RDF data types and makes it easy to
interact with RDF containers and services.
The other key feature of Adenine is its ability to be compiled into
RDF. The benefits of this capability can be classified as
portability and extensibility. Since 1996, p-code virtual machine
execution models have resurged as a result of Java’s popularity.
Their key benefit has been portability, enabling interpretation of
software written for these platforms on vastly different computing
environments. In essence, p-code is a set of instructions written to
a portable, predetermined, and byte-encoded ontology. 
Figure 6. Sample Adenine code
Adenine takes the p-code concept one step further by making the
ontology explicit and extensible and by replacing byte codes with
RDF. Instead of dealing with the syntactic issue of introducing
byte codes for new instructions and semantics, Adenine takes
advantage of RDF’s ability to extend the directed “object code”
# Prefixes for simplifying input of URIs
@prefix : <urn:test-namespace:> 
:ImportantMethod rdf:type rdfs:Class 
method :expandDerivedClasses ; \
rdf:type :ImportantMethod ; \
rdfs:comment \
"x rdf:type y, y rdfs:subClassOf z => x rdf:type z" 
# Perform query 
# First parameter is the query specification 
# Second is a list of the variables to return,
# in order 
= data (query { 
?x rdf:type ?y  
?y rdfs:subClassOf ?z 
} (List ?x ?z))   
# Assert base class types 
for x in data  
# Here, x[0] refers to ?x 
# and x[1] refers to ?z  
add { x[0] rdf:type x[1] } 

 graph with new predicate types. One recent example of a system
that uses metadata-extensible languages is Microsoft’s Common
Language Runtime (CLR). In a language such as C#, developer-
defined attributes can be placed on methods, classes, and fields to
declare metadata ranging from thread safety to serializability.
Compare this to Java, where serializability was introduced only
through the creation of a new keyword called transient. The
keyword approach requires knowledge of these extensions by the
compiler; the attributes approach delegates this knowledge to the
runtime and makes the language truly extensible. In Adenine,
RDF assertions can be applied to any statement. 
These two features make Adenine very similar to Lisp, in that
both support open-ended data models and both blur the distinction
between data and code. However, there are some significant
differences. The most superficial difference is that Adenine’s
syntax and semantics are especially well-suited to manipulating
RDF data. Adenine is mostly statically scoped, but has dynamic
variables that address the current RDF containers from which
existing statements are queried and to which new statements are
written. Adenine’s runtime model is also better adapted to being
run off of an RDF container. Unlike most modern languages,
Adenine supports two types of program state: in-memory, as is
with most programming languages, and RDF container-based.
Adenine in effect supports two kinds of closures, one being an in-
memory closure as is in Lisp, and the other being persistent in an
RDF container. This affords the developer more explicit control
over the persistence model for Adenine programs and makes it
possible for agents written in Adenine to be distributed.
The syntax of Adenine resembles a combination of Python and
Lisp, whereas the data types resemble Notation3 [11]. As in
Python, tabs denote lexical block structure. Backslashes indicate a
continuation of the current line onto the next line. Curly braces
({}) surround sets of RDF statements, and identifiers can use
namespace prefixes (e.g. rdf:type) as shorthand for entering full
URIs, which are encoded within angle brackets (<>). Literals are
enclosed within double quotes. 
Adenine is an imperative language, and as such contains standard
constructs such as functions, for loops, arrays, and objects.
Function calls resemble Lisp syntax in that they are enclosed in
parentheses and do not use commas to separate parameters.
Arrays are indexed with square brackets as they are in Python or
Java. Also, because the Adenine interpreter is written in Java,
Adenine code can call methods and access fields of Java objects
using the dot operator, as is done in Java or Python. The execution
model is quite similar to that of Java and Python in that an in-
memory environment is used to store variables; in particular,
execution state is not represented in RDF. Values in Adenine are
represented as Java objects in the underlying system. 
Adenine methods are functions that are named by URI and are
compiled into RDF. To execute these functions, the Adenine
interpreter is passed the URI of the method to be run and the
parameters to pass to it. The interpreter then constructs an initial
in-memory environment binding standard names to built-in
functions and executes the code one instruction at a time. Because
methods are simply resources of type adenine:Method, one can
also specify other metadata for methods. In the example given, an
rdfs:comment is declared and the method is given an additional
type, and these assertions will be entered directly into the RDF
container that receives the compiled Adenine code.
The top level of an Adenine file is used for data and method
declarations and cannot contain executable code. This is because
Adenine is in essence an alternate syntax for RDF. Within method
declarations, however, is code that is compiled into RDF; hence,
methods are like syntactic sugar for the equivalent Adenine RDF
“bytecode”.
Development on Adenine is ongoing, and Adenine is being used
as a platform for testing new ideas in writing RDF-manipulating
agents.
5. DATA STORAGE
5.1 RDF Store
Throughout this paper we have emphasized the notion of storing
and describing all metadata in RDF. It is the job of the RDF store
to manage this metadata. We provide two implementations of the
RDF store in Haystack. The first is one built on top of a
conventional relational database utilizing a JDBC interface. We
have adopted HSQL, an in-process JDBC-compatible database
written in Java. However, early experiments showed that for the
small but frequent queries we were performing to render Ozone
user interfaces, the RDF store was overloaded by the fixed
marshalling and query parsing costs. Switching to a larger scale
commercial database appears to result in worse performance
because of the socket connection layer that is added in the
process.
To solve these problems we developed an in-process RDF
database written in C++ (we use JNI to connect it to the rest of our
Java code base). By making it specifically suited to RDF, we were
able to optimize the most heavily used features of the RDF store
while eliminating a lot of the marshalling and parsing costs. 
However, we acknowledge this to be a temporary solution, and in
the long term we would prefer to find a database that is well-
suited to the types of small queries that Haystack performs.
5.2 Storing Unstructured Content
It is important for us to address how Haystack interacts with
unstructured data in the existing world. Today, URLs are used to
represent files, documents, images, web pages, newsgroup
messages, and other content accessible on a file system or over the
World Wide Web. The infrastructure for supporting distributed
storage has been highly developed over the past decades. With the
advent of technologies such as XML Namespaces and RDF, a
larger class of identifiers called URIs subsumed URLs. Initially,
RDF provided a means for annotating web content. Web pages,
identified by URL, could be referred to in RDF statements in the
subject field, and this connected the metadata given in RDF to the
content retrievable by the URL. This is a powerful notion because
it makes use of the existing storage infrastructure.
However, with more and more content being described in RDF,
the question naturally arises: why not store content in RDF?
While this is certainly possible by our initial assumption that RDF
can describe anything, we argue this is not the best solution for a
couple of reasons. First, storing content in RDF would be
incompatible with existing infrastructure. Second, leveraging
existing infrastructure is more efficient; in particular, using file
I/O and web protocols to retrieve files is more efficient than using
XML encoding.
Hence, we do not require that existing unstructured content be
stored as RDF. On the contrary, we believe it makes sense to store 

 some of the user’s unstructured data using existing technology. In
our prototype, we provide storage providers based on HTTP 1.1
and standard file I/O. This means that storing the content of a
resource in Haystack can be performed with HTTP PUT, and
retrieving the content of a resource can be performed with HTTP
GET, analogously to how other resources’ contents (e.g., web
pages) are retrieved. Our ontology uses the Content class and its
derivatives, HTTPContent, FilesystemContent, and LiteralContent
to abstract the storage of unstructured information.
6. PUTTING IT TOGETHER
At this point, we have described ontologies for personal
information management and user interfaces, as well as an agent
infrastructure and a data storage layer. In order to gain a fuller
understanding of how these components work together, we
illustrate an example interaction between the user and Haystack.
Figure 7 shows the user’s home page, which is displayed when
Ozone is first started. Like a portal, the Ozone home page brings
together in one screen information important to the user. This
information is maintained by agents working in the background.
The actual presentation of this information is decoupled from the
agents and is the responsibility of Ozone view parts. For instance,
the home page displays the user’s incoming documents collection,
which is managed by the Incoming Agent. When messages arrive,
the Incoming Agent may decide to enter them into the incoming
documents collection. Similarly, when read messages have been
in the incoming documents collection for some period of time, the
Incoming Agent may decide to remove them. These mutations to
the incoming documents collection are automatically detected by
the collection view part sitting on the home page; the view part
updates the display accordingly. One can envision the Incoming
Agent taking on more intelligent behaviors in the future, such as
moving a message deduced to be important but yet unread to the
top of the collection.
As mentioned earlier, strings of text on the screen corresponding
to appointments, news articles, or e-mail messages are not merely
dead pixels. Instead, users can manipulate them with context
menus and drag and drop them between different areas of the
screen. For example, one can imagine dragging an e-mail from the
incoming documents view to the calendar in order to set up an
appointment. Because the underlying semantic object is connected
to the visual representation, the calendar view part can 
Figure 7. Ozone screenshot 

 intelligently determine the correct response to the drop operation.
By removing the burden of user interface rendering from the
agents, the software designers are encouraged to enrich the agents
with more capabilities. One can imagine prolific collaboration
between different agents in the Haystack system. For instance,
upon retrieving the weather forecast for today, the Weather Agent
can notify the Calendar Agent of the grave possibility of a snow
storm approaching; the Calendar Agent in turn can attempt to
reschedule the user’s appointments appropriately. In other
systems, especially portals, the focus of a weather agent would be
on rendering the weather as HTML, not interacting with other
agents to maximize end user benefit.
The news applet displays news downloaded from Resource Site
Summary (RSS) feeds of interest to the user. The RSS Agent
downloads news on a periodic basis and incorporates the RSS
files (which are RDF) into the user’s corpus. To take advantage of
the collection view part for displaying news, another agent
translates the news from the RSS ontology into the Haystack
collection ontology. In the future it will be possible to have
another agent filter the RSS feeds for the particular articles
thought to be most interesting to the user.
Furthermore, the layout of the entire home page and all of its
customizations is described in metadata. As with other objects,
this layout can be annotated, categorized, and sent to others. 
7. FUTURE WORK
Haystack provides a great platform for organizing and
manipulating users’ information. In this section we touch upon
two topics we are currently investigating that build new
abstractions on top of the data model discussed above.
7.1 Collaboration
Enabling users to work together, exchange information, and
communicate has become an absolutely essential feature of
modern information management tools. The focus of current off-
the-shelf products has been on e-mail and newsgroup-style
discussions. However, the addition of rich metadata manipulation
facilities creates many possibilities for Haystack in fostering
collaboration.
First, Haystack encourages users to have individualized
ontologies, so converting between these ontologies when
exchanging data will need to be examined. Agents can be
instructed in the relationships between different ontologies and
can perform conversion automatically. As an alternative one can
imagine an ontological search engine that is consulted whenever a
user enters data. This way users end up using the same ontologies
to describe similarly-structured data.
Second, security issues arise when sharing data. Support for belief
networks will need to be expanded to allow users to distinguish
their own information from information obtained from others.
Access control and privacy will need to be examined to allow
users to feel comfortable about storing information in Haystack.
Finally, metadata describing individual users’ preferences towards
certain topics and documents can be used and exchanged to enable
collaborative filtering. Sites such as epinions.com promote user
feedback and subjective analysis of merchandise, publications,
and web sites. Instead of going to a separate site, users’ Haystacks
can aggregate this data and, by utilizing the belief network,
present users with suggestions.
7.2 Organization Schemes
We have started to investigate the many ways in which people
organize their personal information in physical form, such as
bookcases and piles. We believe that each method of organization
has different advantages and disadvantages in various situations.
In light of this, we propose to support several virtual organization
schemes simultaneously, such that the user can choose the
appropriate organization scheme to use in each situation. Different
schemes act like different lenses on the same corpus of
information. We will provide agents that help the user create and
maintain these organization schemes.
8. REFERENCES
[1] Box, D., Ehnebuske, D., Kavivaya, G., et al. SOAP: Simple
Object Access Protocol.
http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/en-
us/dnsoapsp/html/soapspec.asp.
[2] Goland, Y., Whitehead, E., Faizi, A., Carter, S., and Jensen,
D. HTTP Extensions for Distributed Authoring – WEBDAV.
http://asg.web.cmu.edu/rfc/rfc2518.html. 
[3] Dourish, P., Edwards, W.K., et al. "Extending Document
Management Systems with User-Specific Active Properties."
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 18, no. 2,
April 2000, pages 140–170. 
[4] Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., and Lassila, O. "The Semantic
Web." Scientific American, May 2001. 
[5] Christensen, E., Cubera, F., Meredith, G., and Weerawarana,
S. Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 1.1.
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl. 
[6] Resource Description Framework (RDF) Model and Syntax
Specification. http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-rdf-syntax-
19990222/.
[7] Resource Description Framework (RDF) Schema
Specification. http://www.w3.org/TR/1998/WD-rdf-schema/.
[8] Adar, E., Karger, D.R., and Stein, L. “Haystack: Per-User
Information Environments” in 1999 Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management. 
[9] Karger, D and Stein, L. “Haystack: Per-User Information
Environments”, February 21, 1997. 
[10] Raskin, J. “The Humane Interface.” Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[11] Berners-Lee, T. Primer: Getting into RDF & Semantic Web
using N3. http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/Primer.html. 