See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357083530
The Role of Process Ontology in Cybernetics
Article  in  Synthesis philosophica · January 2022
DOI: 10.21464/sp36211
CITATIONS
6
READS
370
2 authors:
Sandro Skansi
University of Zagreb
40 PUBLICATIONS   76 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Kristina Šekrst
University of Zagreb
44 PUBLICATIONS   36 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Kristina Šekrst on 15 July 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Preliminary	communication	UDC:	111(045)
doi:	10.21464/sp36211
Received:	26	October	2020
Sandro	Skansi1,	Kristina	Šekrst2
1	Sveučilište	u	Zagrebu,	Fakultet	hrvatskih	studija,	Borongajska	cesta	83d,	HR–10000	Zagreb
2	Sveučilište	u	Zagrebu,	Filozofski	fakultet,	Ivana	Lučića	3,	HR–10000	Zagreb
1 sskansi@hrstud.hr, 2 ksekrst@ffzg.hr
The	Role	of	Process	Ontology	in	Cybernetics
Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to show the role of process ontology in cybernetics. The phi-
losophical foundations of cybernetics were laid by Norbert Wiener, who used a language
full of human-machine metaphors described in terms of information, feedback, and control.
We will show that various fields of science still use essentially cybernetic definitions today,
which will lead us to a reformulation of such a language from a philosophical point of view:
The goal of cybernetics is the study of process analogies. Using the principle of compositi-
onality, we will show how a cyberneticist can easily argue for the ontological sameness of
two processes. Such a framework could lead to cybernetics being seen as a fully grounded
philosophical theory. As a corollary, we point out that there is a growing need for cyberne-
tics because, thanks to its specific process ontology, it provides a theoretical framework that
ontologically bridges dualisms that occur throughout contemporary science.
Keywords
cybernetics,	process	ontology,	analogy,	principle	of	compositionality,	dualism
Philosophy	in	Cybernetics1
The	philosophical	foundations	of	cybernetics	were	laid	in	1948	with	Norbert	
Wiener’s	book	Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the Animal
and the Machine	(Wiener	1961,	originally	1948).	What	Gerovitch	would	later	
call cyberspeak	was	originally	conceived	as	a	new	universal	language	as-
sociated	with	a	variety	of	human-machine	metaphors,	described	in	terms	of	
information,	feedback,	and	control	(Gerovitch	2002,	53).	This	put	cybernetics	
on	a	collision	course	with	Marxism	(of	the	Soviet	neo-Soviet	period)	and	later	
to	its	blind	incorporation	into	every	aspect	of	Soviet	life,	which	in	a	sense	did	
little	to	change	the	underlying	metaphysical	assumptions	and	merely	demar-
cated	cybernetics	as	a	new	ideology.	To	illustrate,	at	the	1958	philosophical	
conference,	Lyapunov	and	Sobolev	were	accused	of	reducing	the	concept	of	
life	to	the	circulation	of	information,	and	such	transmission	was	considered	
illegitimate	(Gerovitch	2002,	215),	to	which	Sobolev	replied	that	if	heredity	
was	not	described	as	the	transmission	of	information,	the	only	alternative	
would	be	to	appeal	to	divine	providence.	The	crux	of	their	discussion	can	be	
compared	to	today’s	scientific	definitions.	For	example,	the	definition	of	life	
from	NASA	(Benner	2010)	states	that	life	is	a	“self-sustaining	chemical	sys-
tem	capable	of	Darwinian	evolution”.	Such	a	definition,	which	so	intuitively	
1	 
The	authors	would	like	to	thank	the	anony-
mous	 referees	 whose	 valuable	 suggestions	
were	 instrumental	 in	 formulating	 the	 final	
version	of	this	paper.	In	particular,	we	would	
like	to	thank	one	of	the	referees	for	a	number	
of	motivating	and	valuable	suggestions.	The	
final	sentence	in	the	abstract	is	a	paraphrase	
of	his/hers	comment	to	our	paper,	and	we	con-
sider	it	a	remarkable	and	clear	summarisation	
of	our	ideas	presented	in	this	paper.

462SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
passes	for	a	cybernetic	definition,	is	repeatedly	attacked	with	various	exam-
ples	from	the	biological	world	that	are	not	considered	living	beings	but	are	
covered	by	this	definition,	such	as	a	sodium	chlorate	crystal	that	can	repro-
duce	and	whose	properties	can	be	passed	on	to	its	descendants	(Benner	2010).
Nowadays,	philosophers	unwittingly	use	cybernetic	definitions	as	their	pre-
ferred	method	of	defining	and	distinguishing	metaphysical	and	epistemologi-
cal	objects.	This	is	an	almost	scandalous	non-recognition	of	cybernetics,	made	
worse	by	the	fact	that	cybernetics	was	developed	by	a	philosopher,	Norbert	
Wiener	(discussed	in	Dupuy	2000,	ch.	2).	As	an	example	of	this	deliberate	
avoidance	of	cybernetics,	Hartmann	offered	his	definition	of	a	simulation,	
stating	that	“a	simulation	imitates	one	process	by	another	process”	(Hartmann	
1996).	Durán	states	that
“…	Hartmann’s	definition	stands	on	three	statements:	
a)	a	simulation	is	a	result	of	solving	the	equations	of	a	dynamic	model	
b)	a	computer	simulation	is	a	result	of	having	a	simulation	running	on	a	physical	computer	
c)	a	simulation	imitates	another	process.”	(Durán	2020,	304)
This	 inherently	 cybernetic	 definition	 attempts	 to	 connect	 a	 mathematical	
model	to	a	physical	computer	by	simply	talking	about	processes.	When	a)	
is	complemented	by	b),	a	computer	simulation	results	from	implementing	a	
dynamic	mathematical	model	on	a	physical	computer.	Even	if	we	consider	
Durán’s	analysis	valid,	Hartmann’s	definition	seems	plagued	by	other	meta-
physical	problems.	This	gives	rise	to	the	need	for	a	“process	ontology”	since	
process	is	an	essential	part	of	integrating	cybernetics	not	into	language	as	a	
new	ideology	but	into	the	underlying	metaphysical	worldview.	In	this	paper,	
we	will	show	that	“process	ontology”	is	a	non-trivial	extension	for	any	meta-
physical	system	since	the	ontology	of	processes	has	important	self-referential	
aspects.
But	is	this	pure	philosophy	with	inadvertent	cyberspeak,	or	is	there	cybernetics	
in	philosophy?	To	understand	the	intuition	behind	such	questions,	one	should	
note	that	Hartmann’s	definition	speaks	of	processes	without	ever	addressing	
the	metaphysical	nature	of	a	process.	The	strength	of	Hartmann’s	definition	is	
that	it	makes	no	distinction	between	physical	processes	or,	say,	multiply	gen-
erated	computer	programs,	and	can	be	applied	either	to	a	mirror	image	of	the	
physical	world	or	to	a	computer	simulation.	This	was	only	possible	because	
he	used	cybernetics	as	a	background	theory,	allowing	him	to	easily	switch	
between	different	domains.	To	understand	this,	one	should	recall	that	Wiener	
introduced	cybernetics	as	a	methodological	approach	in	the	introduction	to	
his	1948	book	(Wiener	1961).	There	it	is	argued	that	the	task	of	cybernetics	
was	to	explore	the	analogies	between	processes	in	animals	and	computers	and	
to	explore	their	philosophical	ramifications	(Wiener	1961,	XV).2
It	could	be	argued	that,	unlike	the	Soviet	sphere	of	influence	explored	in	more	
detail	by	Gerovitch	(2002),	Western	societies	were	culturally	predisposed	to	
be	highly	receptive	to	the	implications	of	Wiener’s	ideas,	which	were	already	
being	culturally	absorbed	by	science	fiction	and	technologically	implement-
ed	once	the	technological	conditions	were	met.	Although	there	is	no	direct	
citation	to	support	this	claim,	it	requires	careful	consideration,	which	is	best	
achieved	by	comparing	it	to	the	many	obstacles	to	the	cultural	integration	
of	cybernetics	on	the	other	side	of	the	Iron	Curtain.	The	Eastern	Bloc	had	
largely	adopted	Marxism	as	a	state	ideology,	and	the	main	problem	was	the	
social	position	of	the	computer.	Since	man	constructs	history,	the	computer	

463SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
is	at	best	a	tool.	But	in	the	beginning	(Matyerialist	[Материалист]	1953)	the	
argument	was	quite	different.	Computers	were	considered	tools,	but	it	was	
argued	that	cybernetics	sought	to	elevate	these	tools	to	the	role	that	Marxism	
had	reserved	for	man,	namely	the	creation	of	history.	Moreover,	a	tool	with	
a	high	degree	of	autonomy	would	reduce	the	need	for	skills	to	operate	it,	
and	as	such	would	make	its	operators	(the	proletariat)	redundant	over	time.	
The	question	“Who	does	cybernetics	serve?”	was	thus	answered	ideological-
ly,	making	cybernetics	a	theory	that	was	metaphysically	incompatible	with	
Marxism.	Cybernetics	was	presented	as	contradictory	to	Marxism,	a	thor-
oughly	philosophical	theory,	which	in	turn	meant	that	cybernetics	was	also	
(badly)	presented	as	a	philosophical	theory.	It	took	the	work	of	Lyapunov,	
Kitov	and	Sobolev	(Sóbolev,	Kitóv,	Lyapunóv	1955)	to	reformulate	cyber-
netics	as	a	complete	and	well-developed	philosophical	theory,	and	only	then	
to	show	that	it	was	fully	compatible	with	Marxism.	But	process	ontology,	the	
metaphysical	heart	of	cybernetics	that	makes	cybernetics	primarily	a	philo-
sophical	theory,	remained	undiscovered.
Cybernetics	in	Philosophy
As	Wiener	pointed	in	(Wiener	1961,	xi–xvi	and	11–13),	the	main	objective	
of	cybernetics	as	a	science	is	to	study	the	analogies	between	humans	and	
machines,	but	the	original	goal	of	cybernetics	could	be	rephrased	as	follows:	
The main objective of cybernetics as a theory is to study process analogies.	
The	most	important	question	now	is	whether	cybernetics	is	reductive,3	that	
is,	whether	analogous	processes	are	to	be	regarded	as	the	same	process?	Is	
the	equivalence	of	mind – machine	more	important	than	the	differences	in	
substrata?	This	question	is	difficult	to	answer	as	such,	since	it	depends	largely	
on	metaphysical	preferences.	We	want	to	show	that	by	examining	process	
ontology,	one	can	indeed	provide	a	fully	grounded	metaphysical	basis	for	cy-
bernetics	that	fully	equates	two	analogous	processes	over	different	substrates,	
as	a	consequence	of	a	fully	neutral	process	ontology,	i.e.,	appealing	to	some	
metaphysical	properties	of	processes	that	seem	quite	rational.
A	simple	example	of	process	ontology	working	in	the	background	of	cybernet-
ics	would	be	to	equate	Boolean	circuits4	with	mathematical	reasoning	on	the	
one	hand	and	formulae	of	propositional	logic	on	the	other.	They	all	describe	
(perfectly)	“analogous”	processes,	over	different	metaphysical	substrates.	In	
this	example,	there	is	virtually	no	difference	in	viewpoint:	Both	the	cyber-
netic	and	the	“classical”	views	agree,	and	both	regard	the	abstract	process	
of	model	checking	as	exactly	the	same	thing.	One	reason	for	this	might	be	
that	both	propositional	logic	and	Boolean	circuits	were	developed	specifically	
2	 
It	is	interesting	to	note	that	Wiener	was	a	phi-
losopher	in	the	formal	sense:	he	had	a	Ph.D.	in	
logic	from	Harvard	University,	and	both	of	his	
thesis	supervisors,	Karl	Schmidt	and	Josiah	
Royce,	were	philosophers.	Schmidt’s	disser-
tation	 was	 titled	 Beiträge zur Entwicklung
der Kant’schen Ethik,	 while	 Royce’s	 was	
Interdependence of the Principles of Human
Knowledge.	 These	 facts	 can	 be	 verified	 at	
https://www.genealogy.math.ndsu.nodak.edu/
index.php	(accessed	on	15	November	2021).
3	 
We	 would	 like	 to	 emphasise	 here	 that	 the	
question	of	whether	a	theory	is	reductive	is	al-
most	exclusively	used	to	evaluate	philosoph-
ical	theories.
4	 
For	 more	 information	 on	 circuits,	 see	 e.g.	
(Jukna	 2012)	 which	 provides	 an	 excellent	
overview.

464SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
for	mathematical	reasoning.	However,	we	will	show	that	this	equation	is	the	
consequence	of	a	fairly	rational	process	ontology,	and	this	is	what	makes	cy-
bernetics	beautiful	as	a	philosophical	theory:	the	equating	is	not	a	reduction,	
but	a	natural	consequence	of	a	simple	process	ontology.
The	preceding	example	illustrates	a	simple	case.	In	a	sense,	more	complex	
cases	will	not	differ	significantly	from	this	case,	since	all	human-made	theo-
ries	and	technologies	are	in	some	sense	copied	from	nature.	If	the	correspond-
ence	is	to	be	relaxed	in	terms	of	precision,	we	would	not	claim	that	we	are	
“the	same”	as	nature,	but	merely	that	our	theory	or	technology	is	“inspired	
by	nature.”	Theological	and	Cartesian	ramifications	aside,	this	means	that	all	
human	creations	(or	discoveries,	if	one	prefers	the	realist	usage)	correspond	
to	at	least	some	natural	phenomena.	Although	one	might	be	tempted	to	find	
counter-examples	of	artefacts	that	are	in	no	way	inspired	by	nature,	this	is	
irrelevant	to	our	point	–	it	may	extend	it,	and	as	such	provides	a	direction	for	
future	research,	but	does	not	contradict	it.	The	view	that	there	are	analogies	
between	human-made	artefacts,	be	they	theories	or	technologies,	is	almost	
universally	accepted	as	plausible.	But	if	this	is	so	universal,	what	is	so	special	
about	cybernetics?	In	a	word,	cybernetics	has	hitherto	been	regarded	as	a	re-
ductionist	theory,	but	we	will	show	that	it	discards	nothing	–	its	methodology	
follows	entirely	from	process	ontology	in	a	very	straightforward	sense.
Cybernetics	Riding	Shotgun:	the	“Solution”	of	the
Mind-Body	Problem	in	Early	Artificial	Intelligence	Research
As	reported	by	(Crevier	1993),	Herbert	Simon	said	in	1956	that	he	and	Newell	
invented	a	thinking	machine	(the	Logic	Theorist,	the	first	AI	program	in	his-
tory).	In	particular,	he	noted	that	by	doing	so	they	have	solved	the	mind-body	
problem.	A	crucial	question	here	is:	Why	can	Simon	claim	to	have	solved	the	
mind-body	problem	if	the	processes	are	just	analogs?	There	seems	to	be	a	nat-
ural	answer	here.	Simon	thought	that	their	solution	was	to	show	that	(some)	
cognitive	faculties	are	not	inherently	human	and	cannot	be	achieved	by	a	
machine.	This	can	be	understood	as	a	rejection	of	strong	faculty	dualism.	But	
this	understanding	is	flawed.	If	it	is	enough	to	show	that	there	is	a	cognitive	
ability	that	can	be	implemented	on	computers,	why	did	we	need	a	symbolic	
process?	Why	were	the	basic	operations	relating	to	the	various	substrates	not	
considered	sufficient?	As	noted	by	Ashby	(and	reported	in	Pickering	2010,	
25–31),	without cybernetics as an underlying ontology and methodology, no
claim of the ontological sameness of the process in the human and machine
could have been made.	It	is	only	by	embracing	cybernetics	as	metaphysics	
that	they	might	even	begin	to	argue	for	a	non-dualist	view,	which	clearly	
demonstrates	the	epistemological	power	of	cybernetics.
Regarding	dualism,	most	modern	philosophy	of	mind	is	concerned	not	with	
fundamental	reductions	but	with	cybernetic	process	equality.	For	example,	
mind-brain	identity	theory,	a	form	of	physicalism,	holds	that	mental	states	
are identical	to	states	and	processes	of	the	brain	(Smart	2017,	sect.	5).	Such	
an	identity	presupposes	not	a	reductionist	principle	but	a	cybernetic	principle,	
which	holds	that	mental	processes	are	ontologically	the	same	as	internal	brain	
processes.	Scheutz	(Scheutz	2001,	543–544)	argues	that	we	usually	think	of	
a	functional	correspondence	between	physical	states	and	computational	states	
when	we	try	to	explain	what	it	means	to	implement	a	computation	for	a	phys-
ical	system.

465SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
If	we	are	to	take	the	word	of	Rescorla	(Rescorla	2020)	as	representative	of	
the	computationalist	camp,	the	computationalist	theory	of	mind	claims	that	
the	mind	is	a	computational	system	and	its	problem	solving	are	computations	
similar	in	important	respects	to	computations	executed	by	a	Turing	machine.	
Their	arguments	implicitly	presuppose	a	cybernetic	methodology	and	ontolo-
gy.	Otherwise,	it	would	be	difficult	to	explain	the	greater	or	lesser	correspond-
ence	of	processes	on	different	substrates.5	In	a	sense,	the	cybernetic	view	
here	is	a	simple	one,	as	presented	by	Ross	Ashby	at	the	Macy	conferences	
(Malapi-Nelson	2017,	ch.	6)	and	in	the	introduction	of	his	book	(Ashby	2015,	
5):	machines	need	not	be	mechanical.	A	machine	is	an	information-modifying	
process,	and	from	the	point	of	view	of	cybernetics,	the	substrate	is	irrelevant.	
One	could	argue	that,	from	this	viewpoint,	most	modern,	inherently	dualistic	
AI	uses	pleonasms	such	as	“machine	learning”.
Process	Ontology
The	goal	here	is	to	provide	the	main	argument	on	how	a	cybernetician	might	
reconstitute	any	symbolic	process	so	that	any	two	processes	that	are	analo-
gous,	are	actually	the	same	process.
In	essence,	we	want	to	show	that	the	statement
“I	have	two	different	substrates	which	in	analogous	ways	realize	the	same	process.”
directly	follows	from	the	more	moderate	statement
“I	have	two	different	substrates	which	in	the	same	way realize	two	analogous	processes.”
At	this	point,	it	should	be	noted	that	the	way referred	to	in	these	statements	is
actually a process.	By	using	a	version	of	Plato’s	third-man	argument	(Plato,	
2019),	let	us	formulate	our	argument.
We	need	an	additional	assumption,	which	we	call	the	principle of composi-
tionality of processes:
Any process that can be described (with conjuctions and disjunctions) as hav-
ing subprocesses p1,	…,	pn can be functionally restated as a composition (se-
rial or parallel) of processes p1,	…,	pn.
The	principle	of	compositionality	of	processes	might	seem	to	require	evi-
dence,	if	not	even	a	“proof”,	but	we	find	it	quite	natural.	If	a	process	(with	
a	fixed	input/output	pairing)	can	be	described	with	subprocesses	that	in	turn	
can	be	(re)composed	to	form	a	process	with	the	same	input/output	pairing	as	
the	original	process,	the	composition	is ontologically the same	process	as	the	
5	 
There	is	an	interesting	digression	that	can	be	
addressed	here,	and	we	thank	one	of	the	ref-
erees	for	bringing	it	to	our	attention.	From	a	
historical	perspective,	the	Symbolists	of	the	
1950s	 and	 1960s	 were	 the	 disciples	 of	 the	
original	cyberneticists	and	competed	for	the	
same	funding.	Unlike	their	mentors,	they	had	
some	results	that	contributed	to	higher	fund-
ing,	which	in	turn	contributed	to	the	decline	of	
classical	cybernetics.	They	had	more	success	
because	 symbolic	 computation	 was	 easier	
for	the	computers	of	the	time	and	they	could	
produce	 results.	 Their	 success	 (measured	
mainly	 by	 the	 technology	 produced)	 con-
tributed	significantly	to	the	rise	of	the	com-
putational	theory	of	mind.	But	the	main	idea	
is	 flawed	 because	 computational	 theory	 of	
mind	 essentially	 takes	 the	 intentional	 sim-
plifications	of	symbolic	computation	at	face	
value	and	assumes	that	it	can	produce	AI-like	
results	because	it	better	describes	reality	(a	
realist	view),	while	completely	neglecting	the	
fact	that	the	main	reason	it	produces	results	
is	because	it	is	orders	of	magnitude	simpler	
and	therefore	implementable	(instrumentalist	
view).

466SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
original process, qua	process.	A	sceptic	argument	against	it	might	go	along	
the	lines	of	the	“kripkenstein”	argument	(Kripke	1982,	8–21),	but	here	we	
put	the	emphasis	on	the	input/output	pairing	of	the	whole	process,	not	just	
of	an	extension	of	an	initial	segment.	Since	any	sufficient	description	(in	any	
language)	is	an	algorithm,	it	defines	subprocesses	as	algorithms,	which	are	
themselves	processes.	Such	subprocesses	may,	of	course,	be	constructed	se-
rially	one	after	the	other,	which	corresponds	(more	or	less)	to	conjunction	of	
descriptions,	or	in	parallel,	which	corresponds	(more	or	less)	to	disjunction.
Our	argument	is	as	follows.	Suppose	we	have	analogical	processes	P	and	Q	
over	two	different	substrates,	S1 and S2.	What	we	mean	by	analogical	is	“sym-
bolically	the	same,	yet	different	in	other	aspects”.	Think	of	addition	in	the	
mind	and	in	the	computer.	Analogical	processes	P	and	Q	then	are	connected	
by	the	same	symbolic	content,	let	us	call	it	Y.	So	in	essence	we	have	P	∩	Q	=	
Y and S1	∩	S2	=	0.	But	here	we	are	talking	about	processes,	not	real	sets,	but	
by	using	the	principle	of	compositionality,	we	can	almost	do	set	operations.	
In	fact,	by	the	principle	of	compositionality,	Y	can	be	removed	from	the	pro-
cesses	P	and	Q,	and	set	as	a	different	process	which	comes	after	P\Y	or	Q\Y	
did	their	magic.	We	can	call	P\Y	simply	P1,	Q\Y	we	denote	as	Q2	and	the	now	
“independent”	Y	as	Y1.	It	is	clear	that	Y1	is	a	purely	symbolic	process,	and	that	
S1 and S2	are	purely	substrates.
P1	and	Q1	are	responsible	for	Y1	connection	to	S1 and S2,	and	they	might	still	
have	a	lot	of	subprocesses	in	them.	Some	of	them	are	purely	“adhesive”,	
i.e.	they	connect	Y1	to	the	substrates,	and	some	of	them	might	be	symbolic,	
i.e.	some	processes	that	are	needed	between	the	adhesive	parts	and	Y1	as	the	
ultimate	symbolic	process.	Since	the	substrates	are	different,	the	adhesive	
parts	of	P1	and	Q1	are	different,	but	since	Y1	is	the	same	for	both	P1	and	Q1,	it	
means	that	there	is	a	symbolic	subprocess	that	P1	and	Q1	have	in	common.	By	
using	the	principle	of	compositionality	again	on	P1	and	Q1,	we	can	remove	an	
additional	symbolic	part,	Y2	from	P1	and	Q1	and	obtain	P2	and	Q2 which are
void	of	Y2.
Now	the	final	symbolic	process	Y1	is	preceded	by	another	symbolic	process	
Y2, and Y2	is	connected	by	P2	to	S1	and	by	Q2	to	S2.	If	P2	and	Q2	are	purely	
adhesive,	we	stop,	if	not	we	reiterate	the	process	until	they	are.	The	final	result	
is	that	all	symbolic	processes	have	been	reconstituted	to	be	the	same	process	
over	different	substrates,	and	the	only	parts	of	the	(now	single)	process	which	
is	different	are	the	substrates	and	the	last	Pn	and	Qn	which	are	purely	adhe-
sive,	i.e.	contain	nothing	symbolic,	only	a	simple	connector	to	the	different	
substrates.
Conclusion
What	we	have	shown	with	our	argument	is	that	all	processes	that	are	analogi-
cal	can	be	redescribed	as	being	the	same	up	to	the	point	where	the	only	differ-
ence	is	the	non-symbolic	last	layer	which	acts	as	an	adhesive	of	the	symbolic	
chain	of	processes	to	the	different	substrates.	This	argument	depends	on	the	
principle	of	compositionality	of	processes,	which	is	in	itself	not	problematic.	
It	also	depends	on	the	nature	of	the	processes	involved.	One	could	say	that	our	
argument	will	work	well	for	arithmetical	processes,	but	what	about	e.g.	“see-
ing	a	cat”?	Although	this	seems	like	an	important	objection,	in	fact,	it	is	not.	
Any	process	which	contains	a	symbolic	part	is	subject	to	our	argument	since	
the	symbolic	part	is	the	one	to	be	abstracted.	Seeing	a	cat	has	a	symbolic	part,	

467SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
and	that	part	can	be	abstracted:	both	a	human	and	a	machine	tag	a	photograph	
as	“Cat”,	and	that	is	a	purely	symbolic	process.	Also,	the	human	and	the	ma-
chine	are	different	substrates.	What	our	argument	says	is	that	apart	from	the	
final	symbolic	process	and	the	substrates,	we	can	divide	all	intermediate	steps	
into	symbolic	and	adhesive	parts,	by	removing	one	symbolic	part	at	the	time	
until	all	we	have	is	adhesive	processes.	Then,	the	different	adhesive	processes	
have	no	symbolic	part	in	them,	just	the	connectors	to	the	different	substrates.
In	the	larger	context	of	cybernetics,	our	argument	shows	that	cybernetics	is	
not	only	a	technical	science	but	a	highly	philosophical	one,	i.e.	cybernetics	
is	a	non-dualist	metaphysical	theory.	The	philosophical	aspect	of	cybernetics	
is	not	a	manifest	one,	not	even	an	eliminativist	one.	It	is	a	purely	rational	
position	that	at	its	core	sits	upon	a	peculiar	ontology	of	processes,	which	
behave	in	the	way	we	have	described.	As	such,	cybernetics	is	not	an	intellec-
tual	shortcut,	but	a	fully	grounded	philosophical	approach	that	emphasizes	
processes	over	objects,	as	almost	every	traditional	theory	does.	If	traditional	
philosophy	is	object-oriented,	then	cybernetics	does	the	same	thing,	but	it	is	
process-oriented.	One	then	might	be	tempted	to	call	cybernetics	simply	“pro-
cedural	philosophy”.
References
Ashby,	W.	Ross	(2015):	An Introduction to Cybernetics,	Martino	Fine	Books,	London.
Benner,	Steven	A.	(2010):	“Defining	life”,	Astrobiology	10	(2010)	10,	pp.	1021–1030,	doi:	
https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2010.0524.
Crevier,	Daniel	(1993):	AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artificial Intelligence,
Basic	Books,	New	York.
Dupuy,	Jean-Pierre	(2000):	The Mechanization of the Mind: On the Origins of Cognitive
Science,	Princeton	University	Press,	Princeton.
Durán,	Juan	M.	(2020):	“What	is	a	simulation	model?”,	Minds and Machines	30	(2020),	
pp.	301–323,	doi:	https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-020-09520-z.
Gerovitch,	Slava	(2002):	From Newspeak to Cyberspeak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics,
MIT	Press,	Cambridge	(MA).
Hartmann,	Stephan	(1996):	“The	World	as	a	Process:	Simulations	in	the	Natural	and	Social	
Sciences”,	in:	Rainer	Hegselmann,	Ulrich	Mueller,	Klaus	G.	Troitzsch	(eds.),	Modelling
and Simulation in the Social Sciences from the Philosophy of Science Point of View, Kluwer
Academic	Publishers,	Dordrecht	–	Boston,	pp.	77–100,	doi:	https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
94-015-8686-3.
Jukna,	Stasys	(2012):	Boolean Function Complexity: Advances and Frontiers, Springer,
Heidelberg,	doi:	https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24508-4.
Kripke,	Saul	A.	(1982):	Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language,	Harvard	University	
Press,	Cambridge	(MA).
Malapi-Nelson,	Alcibiades	 (2017):	 The Nature of the Machine and the Collapse of
Cybernetics: A Transhumanist Lesson for Emerging Technologies,	Springer	International	
Publishing,	Cham.
Matyerialist	 [Материалист]	 (1953):	 “Кому	 служит	 кибернетика?”	 [“Komu	 sluzhit	
kibernetika?”], Вопросы философии 5	(1953)	[Voprosy filosofii	5	(1953)],	pp.	210–219.
Pickering,	Andrew	(2010):	The Cybernetic Brain: Sketches of Another Future,	University	
of	Chicago	Press,	Chicago.
Plato	(2019):	Plato’s Parmenides,	transl.	Albert	Keith	Whitaker,	Focus	Publishing,	New	
York.

468SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
Rescorla,	Michael	(2020):	“The	computational	theory	of	mind”,	The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy.	 Available	 at:	 https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/computational-mind/
(accessed	on	26	November	2021).
Scheutz,	 Matthias	 (2001):	 “Computational	 versus	 Causal	 Complexity”,	 Minds and
Machines	11	(2001),	pp.	543–566.
Smart,	J.	J.	C.	(2007):	“The	Mind/Brain	Identity	Theory”,	The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.	Available	at:	https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mind-identity/	(accessed	on	26	
November	2021).
Sóbolev,	 Sergéj	 Livóvič;	 Kitóv,	 Anatólij	 Ivánovič;	 Lyapunóv,	 Alekséj	 Andréjevič	
[Со́болев,	 Серге́й	 Льво́вич;	 Кито́в,	 Анато́лий	 Ива́нович;	 Ляпуно́в,	 Алексе́й	
Андре́евич	(1955):	“Основные	черты	кибернетики”	[“Osnovnyye	cherty	kibernetiki”],	
Вопросы философии	4:	[Voprosy filosofii	X	(1955)	136.
Wiener,	Norbert	(1961):	Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and
the Machine,	MIT	Press,	Cambridge	(MA).
Sandro	Skansi,	Kristina	Šekrst
Uloga	procesne	ontologije	u	kibernetici
Sažetak
Svrha je ovoga rada pokazati ulogu procesne ontologije u kibernetici. Filozofske temelje ki-
bernetike postavio je Norbert Wiener, koji se služio jezikom punim metafora čovjeka-stroja,
opisanih u terminima informacija, povratnih informacija i kontrole. Pokazat ćemo da se razli-
čita područja znanosti i danas koriste bitno kibernetičkim definicijama, što će nas dovesti do
preformulacije takvog jezika s filozofijske točke gledišta: cilj je kibernetike proučavanje proce-
snih analogija. Koristeći se načelom kompozicije, pokazat ćemo kako kibernetičar može lako
argumentirati ontološku istost dvaju procesa. Takav okvir mogao bi dovesti do toga da se kiber-
netika smatra potpuno utemeljenom filozofijskom teorijom. Kao posljedicu, ističemo da postoji
rastuća potreba za kibernetikom jer, zahvaljujući svojoj specifičnoj procesnoj ontologiji, ona
pruža teorijski okvir koji ontološki premošćuje dualizme prisutne u cijeloj suvremenoj znanosti.
Ključne	riječi
kibernetika,	procesna	ontologija,	analogija,	princip	kompozicionalnosti,	dualizam
Sandro	Skansi,	Kristina	Šekrst
Die	Rolle	der	Prozessontologie	in	der	Kybernetik
Zusammenfassung
Die Intention dieser Arbeit ist es, die Rolle der Prozessontologie in der Kybernetik aufzu-
zeigen. Der philosophische Unterbau der Kybernetik wurde von Norbert Wiener geschaffen,
der eine Sprache voller Mensch-Maschine-Metaphern verwendete, die unter dem Aspekt von
Information, Feedback und Kontrolle geschildert wurden. Wir werden zeigen, dass differente
Wissenschaftsgebiete auch heutzutage noch im Grunde kybernetische Definitionen verwenden,
was uns zu einer Neuformulierung einer solchen Sprache aus philosophischem Blickwinkel
führen wird: Das Ziel der Kybernetik ist die Erforschung von Prozessanalogien. Anhand des
Kompositionalitätsprinzips werden wir darlegen, wie ein Kybernetiker leicht für die onto-
logische Selbigkeit zweier Prozesse eintreten kann. Ein solcher Rahmen könnte dazu führen,
dass die Kybernetik als eine vollständig begründete philosophische Theorie erachtet wird. Als
Schlussfolgerung deuten wir darauf hin, dass ein wachsender Bedarf an Kybernetik besteht,
da sie dank ihrer spezifischen Prozessontologie einen theoretischen Rahmen liefert, der die in
der gesamten zeitgenössischen Wissenschaft in Erscheinung tretenden Dualismen ontologisch
überbrückt.
Schlüsselwörter
Kybernetik,	Prozessontologie,	Analogie,	Kompositionalitätsprinzip,	Dualismus

469SYNTHESIS	PHILOSOPHICA
72	(2/2021)	p.p.	(461–469)
S.	Skansi,	K.	Šekrst,	The	Role	of	Process	
Ontology	in	Cybernetics
Sandro	Skansi,	Kristina	Šekrst
Le	rôle	de	l’ontologie	processuelle	dans	la	cybernétique
Résumé
L’objectif de ce travail est de montrer le rôle de l’ontologie processuelle dans la cybernétique.
Les fondements cybernétiques ont été institués par Nobert Wiener qui se servait d’un langage
rempli de métaphores sur l’homme-machine, décrites en termes d’informations, de retours d’in-
formations et de contrôles. Nous montrerons que les divers domaines de la science utilisent au-
jourd’hui encore des définitions cybernétiques, ce qui nous amènera à reformuler un tel langage
à partir du point de vue philosophique. Le but de la cybernétique est d’enseigner les analogies
processuelles. En nous servant du principe de composition, nous montrerons comment le cyber-
néticien peut aisément argumenter en faveur de l’identité ontologique de deux processus. Un
tel contexte pourrait mener à l’idée selon laquelle la cybernétique trouverait entièrement ses
fondements dans la théorie philosophique. En conséquence, nous mettrons en avant le fait qu’il
existe un besoin grandissant pour la cybernétique puisque, grâce à son ontologie processuelle
spécifique, elle offre un cadre théorique qui ontologiquement dépasse les dualismes présents
dans la science contemporaine.
Mots-clés
cybernétique,	ontologie	processuelle,	analogie,	principe	de	compositionnalité,	dualisme
View publication stats