The Desktop Support Technician provides desktop support for company employees in a timely manner to ensure optimal workstation performance.

ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS:

Troubleshoots network connectivity issues.
Diagnoses and resolves technical issues with hardware or software systems.
Responds promptly to queries and provides excellent customer service at all times.
Communicates via phone, in person, or online chat to understand and troubleshoot technical issues.
Determines the need for and subsequently provides system reconfiguration.
Assesses user needs and recommends technical solutions such as patches, upgrades, or enhancements.
Documents technical support procedures and maintains customer records.
Provides information on proper installation, maintenance, and use of technical systems.
Completes thorough installations on the client environment by taking backups of data, upgrading systems as needed, and installing new software or hardware solutions.
Collaborates with Systems Administrator; reviews and analyzes hardware and software needs; recommends changes and upgrades.
Communicates effectively with both technical and non-technical personnel to solve issues.
Other duties, as assigned.
QUALIFICATIONS:

AA degree or technical training in an IT-related field.
1-3 years’ proven experience providing excellent customer service.
Requires a consistent and dependable work history, ideally reflecting 3-5 years of tenure with each previous employer.
Network+, A+, Security+, and/or ITIL certification, preferred.
Ability to protect the organization’s value by keeping information confidential.
Solid analytical and troubleshooting skills with a strong focus on results.
Excellent communication and customer service skills.
Able to establish and maintain effective working relationships with coworkers, employees, and vendors.
Ability to be on-call and work after-hours, as needed.
Knowledge of the following, preferred: Office 365, Enterprise Antivirus, VMware Horizon View, Active Directory, Windows Update Service, and Microsoft Deployment Toolkit.
CLOSING DATE: 9/25/26

Syntech job descriptions are meant as summarizations only. They do not necessarily reflect all duties and responsibilities of a position.

Syntech is a drug and alcohol-free work environment and Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer (Minority/Female/Disabled/Veteran)       